       Neutral Citation Number: [2021] EWCA Crim 128     Case No: 202100094 B1, 20210011 0 B1, 202100112 B1, 202100113 B1   IN THE COURT OF APPEAL ( CRIMINAL  DIVISION)   ON APPEAL FROM THE CROWN COURT AT LIVERPOOL   The Hon Mr Justice Dove     Royal Courts of Justice   Strand, London, WC2A 2LL     Date: 05/02/2021   Before:     THE RT HON THE LORD BURNETT OF MALDON,   LORD CHIEF JUSTICE OF ENGLAND AND WALES   THE RT HON LORD JUSTICE EDIS   and  THE HON MRS JUSTICE WHIPPLE   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Between:      A, B, D & C  Appellant    - and -    REGINA  Respondent     - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -    Mr. Peter Wright, Q.C. and Mr. Ian Whitehurst  for A  Mr. Matthew Ryder, Q.C. and Mr. Simon McKay for B  Mr. Andrew Radcliffe, Q.C. and Mr. Matthew Buckland  for D  Mr. Rupert Bowers, Q.C. and Ms. Sarah Vine  for C  All assigned by the Registrar of Criminal Appeals   Mr. Jonathan Kinnear, Q.C. and Mr. Tom Payne for the Prosecution     Hearing date: 20 January 2021   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Approved Judgment       Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      THE LORD BURNETT OF MALDON CJ :  Introduction   1. The issue in this appeal is whether evidence obtained from a mobile phone system  known as EncroChat (“the EncroChat material”), which was marketed to its users as  totally secure, can be admitted in evidence in criminal proceedings or is excluded by  the Inv estigatory Powers Act 2016 (“the 2016 Act”).  The main question is whether the  communications were intercepted at the time they were being transmitted or, as the  judge found, were recovered (intercepted) from storage.  If the judge was right, subject  to a number of subsidiary arguments, the evidence would be admissible. As we shall  explain, the security of the EncroChat system was breached by a French law  enforcement agency.   Reporting restrictions   2. The appeal is against a ruling  by Dove J in a preparatory hearing held under s ection 29  of the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996  (“the 1996 Act”) .   Pursuant to  section 37 of the 1996 Act the reporting of these proceedings is prevented until the  conclusion of the trial, save for specified  basic facts such as the name of the accused  and the offence, unless the court orders that the provisions do not apply.  There is an  identical restriction on reporting of the proceedings in the Crown Court.  This is a  reporting restriction.   There is no b ar on the decisions of this court and the Crown  Court being shared among judges and legal professionals so that they may inform  decisions in other cases involving the same issues.  Those further decisions will also be  subject to reporting restrictions.   As will appear below, we make a direction under  section 37(4) of the 1996 Act with the effect that this judgment (but not that of the  Crown Court) can be reported.   The scope of the appeal   3. Dove J directed that a preparatory hearing should be held in order to  decide whether  the EncroChat material obtained by the National Crime Agency from the EncroChat  system of communications is admissible as evidence against these appellants in the  criminal proceedings which are pending against them.  In a reserved written r uling  handed down on 4 January 2021 he decided that it was.   4. The judge also rejected submissions:   a. that he should exclude the EncroChat material under section 78 of the Police  and Criminal Evidence Act 1984; and   b. that he should stay the criminal proceedings a s an abuse of the process of the  court.   5. There is no appeal against these further two decisions.  We deal only with the legal  issue of the admissibility of the EncroChat material.  That issue is not affected by the  facts of the allegations against these app ellants and it is not necessary for us to refer to  those facts at all.  The allegations are serious and have yet to be tried.  Nothing in this  judgment is capable of causing any prejudice to the trial.  As will appear, there are a  significant number of cas es pending in England and Wales derived from EncroChat Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      material which otherwise are quite unconnected with this one.  For this reason, it is  important that the legal admissibility issues in this case should be determined in a  judgment of this court which c an now be published.  For that reason, we direct under  section 37(4) of 1996 Act that the restriction under section 37(1) shall not apply to this  judgment.  It may be published.  The restrictions continue to apply in all other respects.   This judgment is a nonymised, and the names of the appellants must not be published  until after the trial is concluded, in accordance with the statutory scheme which is varied  only to the extent just identified.    6. The preparatory hearing appears to have lasted 1 5 days between the 1 6 November and  3 December 2020.  It involved hearing a great deal of oral evidence including expert  evidence.  The judge set out that evidence and his conclusions on it with great care in a  judgment which runs to 129 pages.  Some of it i s relevant to the legal issue before us,  but much of it is not.  It appears that the appellants conducted a lengthy and perhaps  rather conjectural search for an abuse of process and, on the finding of the judge, failed  to find anything.  Other judges deali ng with these cases will have the benefit of Dove  J’s ruling on that issue.  If it is intended to repeat this kind of process in other pending  cases involving EncroChat material, those involved should not be surprised if the trial  judges deal with them rat her more briskly.   The context of the legal issue   7. The EncroChat material was obtained by a Joint Investigation Team (JIT) of French  and Dutch investigators and prosecutors by interfering in the EncroChat  communications system.  It was then supplied to the U nited Kingdom authorities where  it was used in a large number of investigations, including the one which led to the  present case.  The judge was required to hear evidence about how this occurred, and  then to make findings of fact.  He then had to apply the  United Kingdom domestic law  governing the admissibility of such material, which is found in the 2016 Act.   8. The 2016 Act adopted a domestic law framework which is unique in Europe and which  resembles previous regimes.  Historically, intercept material (clas sically phone tapping,  but not limited to that) could be lawfully obtained by the authorities.  Subject to a  number of immaterial exceptions, it could not be used in evidence in proceedings but  was reserved for intelligence use.  The policy justification f or that approach has been  debated on many occasions and centres around protecting sensitive capabilities and  wider operational and practical concerns.  All were discussed in Intercept as Evidence ,  December 2014 Cmnd 898 9 which was the report of a review of  Privy Councillors  provided to Ministers.  In many other jurisdictions, including France and the  Netherlands, there is no blanket prohibition on the admission into evidence of intercept  material.  The 2016 Act superseded the law found in the Regulation of Investigatory  Powers Act 2000, which itself replaced the Interception of Communications Act 1985.   Major changes between the current regime and the one established in the 2000 Act  concern the new regulatory and supervisory system established by the 2016 Ac t.  The  law relating to admissibility of intercept material, and the definition of what is and is  not intercept material also changed in important ways.    9. The essential point before us is the submission, rejected by the judge, that the  EncroChat material i s intercept material and inadmissible in criminal proceedings  because of section 56 of the 2016 Act, and further that it was unlawfully obtained under  a Targeted Equipment Interference warrant, when its obtaining should have been Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      identified as a kind of in terception which would require a Targeted Interception  warrant.  Targeted Equipment Interference warrants are governed by Part 5 of the 2016  Act and may produce material which can be used in evidence.  Targeted Interception  warrants are governed by Part 2 of the Act and the product is inadmissible in evidence  in almost all criminal proceedings, including these.  The judge found that the EncroChat  material in this case was obtained under Part 5 warrants.  These were approved by Sir  Kenneth Parker, a Judicial  Commissioner, on 5 March 2020, and Sir Brian Leveson,  the Investigatory Powers Commissioner, on 26 March 2020, prior to the obtaining of  the EncroChat material.  The second warrant was needed in order to widen the scope  of the first for reasons which are not material to the issues before us.  The issue is  whether that approach was correct, or whether on a true understanding of the way the  data were obtained, and of the 2016 Act, they comprised material obtained unlawfully  under the wrong warrant and, in an y event, were inadmissible.    The facts as found by the judge   10. Much of the factual background to the issues in this appeal is set out by the Divisional  Court (Singh LJ and Dove J) in a decision refusing permission to pursue judicial review  proceedings chall enging the European Investigation Order brought by C, one of the  appellants in this case, see R (C) v. Director of Public Prosecutions  [2020] EWHC 2967  Admin.  The judge set out the evidence in relation to this aspect of the process in great  detail and it is not necessary for us to rehearse that here.  The judgment of the Divisional  Court is in the public domain.  The scheme for European Investigation Orders in the  Criminal Justice (European Investigation Order) Regulations 2017, SI 2017 No. 730   (“the 2017 Regulations”) in force at the material time is set out in that judgment.  By  regulation 7, a designated public prosecutor had the power to make or validate a  European Investigation Order.   11. The judge summarised the nature of the EncroChat system in paragraph  4 of his ruling  as follows:   “EncroChat is a system of encrypted communication. It operates  using specific handsets provided by the EncroChat system  operator, and functions on the basis that the EncroChat devices  can only communicate with other EncroChat d evices. The  EncroChat devices have dual operating systems, one being the  EncroChat operating system itself, and the second being a  standard Android system with no functionality. Depending upon  how the handset is switched on, it will start in either the  EncroChat or the Android system mode. In order for one user of  EncroChat to speak to another it is necessary for them to know  the unique user identification, or handle, of that person. Akin to  other systems of encrypted communication, any message using  the En croChat system is encoded or encrypted as it passes  through the EncroChat server between one handset and another,  being decoded or de -encrypted at the receiving handset so that  the user can read it. ”   12. The JIT called its harvesting of EncroChat material “Op eration Emma”.  The judge  explained how Operation Emma had come to the attention of the United Kingdom  authorities and how it had proceeded.  The important findings for the points which we Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      have to decide concern the way in which the material which was supp lied to the United  Kingdom authorities had been obtained.  In short summary, the EncroChat servers were  in France and the French Gendarmerie had discovered a way to send an implant to all  EncroChat devices in the world under cover of an apparent update.  T hat implant caused  the device to transmit to the French police all the data held on it.  This was called the  Stage 1 process.  It would capture all data which had not been erased, typically therefore  7 days’ worth of communications.  Thereafter, in the Sta ge 2 process, the implant  collected messages which were created after Stage 1.  The Stage 2 collections occurred  after what was called “the infection”, which was the point at which the implant first  arrived on the device and executed Stage 1.    13. It was nece ssary for the judge to determine whether the EncroChat material was Part 2  Intercept material or Part 5 Equipment Interference material.  The relevant background  facts can be stated quite shortly:   i) The French had all the necessary legal instruments in place  to undertake the  extraction of the material from the devices all over the world lawfully as a matter  of French law.   ii) The implant was loaded by the French authorities on to the EncroChat servers  in Roubaix and then via the servers uploaded onto all the Encr oChat devices  worldwide.   iii) In response to the European Investigation Order issued by the United Kingdom  authorities, the National Crime Agency was permitted by the French Authorities  to have access to the data being obtained with effect from 1 April 2020.  T his  was the date on which the French authorities started the collection of the data  from the EncroChat devices.   iv) C3N is the French police digital crime unit.  It gave its name, so far as these  proceedings are concerned, to the implant and the means by which  it extracted  and preserved data.  The judge found that the data which was harvested by the  implant was sent by the device to the C3N server and then on to the server at  Europol.   14. The judge then set out his findings of fact in a little more detail as to how  the system  worked in six im portant paragraphs:   “148. Within each device there are two forms of memory:  Realm, which holds an archive of apps and data for use on the  device, and RAM which is a faster and temporary type of  memory which holds apps and data w hilst the app is running on  the device and is used for the operation of the app and supporting  the activity of the CPU. To make use of the EncroChat system  the owner of a device needed, firstly, to open the app on the  device. Upon launch, the app’s program  and some of its data  would be drawn from Realm into RAM for use by the CPU in  order to send and receive messages. The owner would compose  a message on the device for an identified contact and this would  be held in RAM for the purposes of the app, and when  instructed  to send the message the app ensured its encryption, following Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      which it would be sent to the radio chip and antenna for it  to be  transmitted out of the device to the EncroChat server. Having  passed through the EncroChat server, via the receiver ’s message  queue, the message would arrive on the receiving device when it  was switched on and was running the EncroChat app. The  message would be decrypted and then held in RAM, and married  with other information on the receiving device which was  relevant  to the app, including for instance the receiving device  owner’s nickname for the sender. The message would then be  held in RAM for the purposes, for instance of being displayed on  the screen of the device, or being forwarded to other contacts.   The message  would be sent to Realm when either the app was  closed down or the device was turned off, unless, of course the  user had deleted it using the app prior to closing the app down.    [underlining added].   149. It is very clear, indeed uncontroversial, that the effect of the  implant was to lead to exfiltration of the messages from the  devices: the messages were not taken after they had left the  device of the sender or before they had arrived on the device of   the receiver. This conclusion is supported by the fact that at the  time that they were taken the messages were not encrypted, and  had therefore been taken before encryption on the sending device  and after decryption on the receiving device. The data which   arrived at the C3N server from both the sending and the  receiving device as a consequence of the implant was copied  from data which was on the device. In relation to stage 1, this  data was copied from the Realm part of the device’s hardware  and sent to C3 N. It again appears to be common ground that the  stage 1 operation of the implant, what Mr Campbell1 described  as a sweep, occurred several times on each device in the early  days after the commencement of the operation of the implant. In  relation to stage  2, it is clear that in relation to the sending device  the data was copied from data held in the memory in RAM,  whilst it was present in RAM as a consequence of the EncroChat  app and the app working with the data. Mr Campbell’s evidence  in relation to the time taken between the creation of the message,  the exfiltration of the data and its arrival at C3N provides some  support for this conclusion. The analysis of both Mr Shrimpton2  and Mr Campbell supports the existence of the two stages of the  operation of the implant. As was explained, the data would  remain in RAM and would not be removed to Realm for the  period of time that the app was open on the device: that could  obviously amount to a very lengthy period.    150. In relation to the receiving device, it i s clear from the  evidence relating to the nickname that by the time the received    1 An expert called on behalf of the appellants.   2 An officer of the National Crime Agency cyber crime unit, who  gave evidence of fact and also explained how  the system worked.  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      message came to be exfiltrated it had been packaged with data  from Realm (or data which had previously been taken from  Realm and was in RAM with the app) and was not being  transmitted: it had arrived and was established as received after  transmission on the device. Again, this data would remain in  RAM on the device, with such data as had been joined with it,  for so long as the app remained open on the phone and would  only be tr ansferred to Realm when the app was closed or the  device turned off. Further, it is clear from the evidence, in  particular in relation to the received messages, that the copied  data extracted to the C3N server was not identical to that which  had been sent from the sender’s device to the receiver’s device.   151. What is notable, in my view, is the correspondence in  principle between these findings in relation to the operation of  the implant and the description noted from the information at the  Europol meetin g by Ms Sweeting3, along with the explanation  which M. Decou4 confirmed which had been written on her  laptop. It was a two stage process in which, firstly, historic data  was removed from the device and then, secondly, messages were  gathered from the devi ces on an ongoing basis.    152. Turning  to the application  of the 2016  Act against   the background  of these factual  matters,  as set out above  the first  question  is whether  the EncroChat  data falls  within  section   4(4)(a)  or 4(4)(b)  of the 2016  Act. Whatever  adjectives  were used   in the evidence,  this question  falls to be determined  on the  basis  of the application  of the statutory  provisions  and not, for  instance,  whether  a witness or  document  used the term “live”  or  “stored”.  The question  of the status  of the communication  at the  relevant  time is whether  it was at that time “being  transmitted”  or “is stored  in or by the [telecommunication]   system  (whether before  or after its transmission)”.  I have   reached  the conclusion  that I am sure that  the EncroChat  data is  properly  regarded  to be falling  within  section  4(4)(b) of the  2016  Act for the  following reasons.   153. It is common ground that the communications must be  either within section 4(4)(a) or section 4(4)(b): there is no third  or alternative intermediate category. It is clear to me on the  evidence that, firstly, at the relevant time when the messages  were made available they were not “being transmitted”. As set  out above, they were not taken when the message was being  transmitted from the sender’s device to that of the receiver.5  Furthermore, again as set out above, they were copied from data  which was held on the device, and it was a copy which was sent    3 An intelligence officer of the National Crime Agency.   4 M. Decou is a French police officer who had given relevant evidence in a witness statement which the judge  admitted as hearsay under Part 11, Chapter 2 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003   5 This sentence is particularly criticised by the appellants, see paragraph 36(c) below.  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      to the C3N server. It is, in my view, particularly clear from the  evidence in relation to the data exfiltrated from the receiving  device that the data was not made available whilst being  transmitted. The incorpo ration of the nickname for the sender  from the data held in the receiver’s device (either from Realm or  already available in RAM) demonstrates that the transmission  process in respect of that data had conclusively finished and it  cannot be said that the da ta was,  at the stage it was taken, being  transmitted. In relation to the sender, the message was also stored  on the device in RAM and copied from there by the implant  before being encrypted and leaving the device and being  transmitted. It follows that the EncroChat data was not “being  transmitted” at the time it was taken and was properly to be  regarded as “stored in or by the system (whether before or after  transmission)” and subject to section 4(4)(b) of the 2016 Act. I  have no difficulty in concluding th at the holding of the message  data in RAM memory as described above is to be regarded as  being stored in or by the system (either before or after  transmission) for the purposes of the 2016 Act. ”  The positions of the parties before the judge   15. The principal q uestion for the judge, as for us, is  whether the communications fell  within section 4(4)(b) of the Act, as the prosecution submitted or section 4(4)(a) of the  Act, as the appellants submitted .  This involves deciding whether , at the point when  they were in tercepted, they were “stored in or by ” the telecommunications system by  which they were transmitted, or whether they were “being transmitted” at that point.   The appellants  submitted that the EncroChat  material was  inadmissible by reason of the  exclusionary rule in section 56 of the 2016 Act. That, in short, was said to be so because  it was intercepted while it was “being transmitted”.    16. The prosecution submitted that   i) the EncroChat messages were admissible and fe ll within the exc eption provided  by section 56(1) a nd schedule 3 paragraph 2 of the Act because the messages  were “stored in or by the system” at the time when they were intercepted; and,  in any event,   ii) that the material was not obtained as a result of “interception related  conduct”  because none of the five classes of such conduct (as contained within section  56(2) of the Act) applied to the present case, alternatively it was not conduct  carried out in the United Kingdom within the scope of section 4(8) of the Act.     17. There w as a further issue as to whether the United Kingdom authorities had made an  unlawful request for assistance to the French authorities contrary to prohibitions  contained in sections 9 and 10 of the 2016 Act.   An agreement between the parties about handsets   18. The argument before the judge and before us has proceeded on the basis that the  handsets are part of the “public telecommunications system”, and therefore that Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      material stored on them is stored “in or by the system”.  The system in this case is a  “public te lecommunications system”, as defined in section 261(8), (9) and (13) which  are set out in the Appendix.  We have reservations about whether handsets do ordinarily  form part of the “system”, given the nature of modern mobile phones which have many  functions .  In particular, section 4(3) extends the definition of an act of interception to  include interference with any wireless telegraphy apparatus used for making  transmissions to or from apparatus that is part of the syste m.  Before us it was suggested  that t his would include mobile phone handsets.  This extension would be unnecessary  if the wireless telegraphy apparatus is part of the system.  The extension of “relevant  act” so that it extends to interference with handsets may be contrasted with the lack of  any such extension in relation to the definition of the system for the purposes of  considering the “relevant time”.   It would suggest that unless specifically provided  otherwise, handsets are not part of “the system”.  Section 4(3) would not be necessary  at all if the agreed position of the parties before us is right.  This issue was not argued  by the parties, and we will approach this appeal on the agreed basis that in respect of  the EncroChat system the handsets are part of “the system”.  Whether that is right or  not in general, it is possible to see how it could be true of this particular system in view  of the findings of the judge about its nature, in paragraph 4 of his ruling set out above  at our paragraph [11].   We do not decide the point, but proceed  on the basis of the  agreement between the parties reached in respect of this particular system.  If the  handsets were not part of the system, then interrogating them and extracting their  content would not amount to interception at all, and the current iss ue of admissibility  would not arise.   The relevant statutory provisions   19. The Appendix to this judgment contains an explanation of the relevant statutory scheme  and sets out the most relevant provisions.  The key provisions for us are sections 3, 4,  6, 99, an d 56 of, and Schedule 3 to, the 2016 Act.  These are connected to sections 9  and 10 which govern the warrantry requirements for cases involving international co - operation.  It is worth recording that section 10 has changed materially since the end of  2020 because of the United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the European Union, and we  are dealing with the law as it was at the time when the relevant activity took place in  this case, and when the issues were decided by the judge.  Sections 9 and 10 , as they  were in  force at the relevant time , are set out in the Appendix.   20. The provision which is central to this appeal is section 4.  The statutory context of  section 4 is that it defines terms which are used in section 3 and section 56, both of  which are set out so far as relevant in the Appendix.  Section 3 is the offence creating  provision.  It provides, among other things, that it is an offence to intercept intentionally  a communication in the course of its transmission by a public telecommunications  system where the interception is carried out in the United Kingdom and the person does  not have lawful authority to carry out the interception.    21. Section 56(1) provides for the exclusion of, among other things, evidence in legal  proceedings:   “…….which (in any manner) —  (a) discloses, in circumstances from which its origin in  interception -related conduct may be inferred — Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      (i) any content of an intercepted communication, or   (ii) any secondary data obtained from a communication, or   (b) tends to suggest that any interception -related conduct has or  may have occurred or may be going to occur.   This is subject to Schedule 3 (exceptions). ”  22. Section 56(2) defines “intercept ion-related conduct”.  It includes, by section 56(1)(a)  conduct by defined United Kingdom authoriti es which is, or in the absence of any  lawful authority would be, an offence under section 3(1).  This is the provision designed  to keep interception techniques secret for the policy reasons identified at paragraph [8]  above.  Parliament has preserved that policy but also provided that it does not extend  to the material described in Schedule 3.  The Schedule 3 exceptions include, in  paragraph 2:   “(1) Section 56(1)(a) does not prohibit the disclosure of any  content of a communication, or any secondary data ob tained  from a communication, if the interception of that  communication was lawful by virtue of any of the following  provisions —    (a) sections 6(1)(c) ”    23. Section 6 defines what “lawful authority” means for the purposes of these provisions.   Subsection (1)(c ) includes the following:   “6. Definition of “lawful authority”   (1) For the purposes of this Act, a person has lawful authority to  carry out an interception if, and only if —     ……….   (c) in the case of a communication stored in or by a  telecommunication syst em, the interception —  (i) is carried out in accordance with a targeted equipment interference  warrant under Part 5. ”  24. Part 5 of the Act provides for the issue and consequences of a type of warrant called a  Targeted Equipment Interference warrant, defined in section 99.  This type of warrant  may be one which authorises or requires the person to whom it is addressed to secu re  interference with any equipment for the purpose of obtaining communications, but it  may also authorise conduct which is not related to communications at all.  Where the  authorised conduct amounts to interception of communications, its product is  admissi ble in evidence under section 6(1)(c).  It would appear that Parliament has  decided that the need to keep the techniques used in the interception of communications  secret does not extend to techniques used in extracting data from equipment even if  they may  recover communications.  The way in which that policy decision is given  effect in the 2016 Act is by providing for the different treatment of what it describes as  communications “stored in or by a telecommunication system”, a phrase which we have  seen in section 6(1)(c) and which originates in section 4, to which we now turn.  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      25. Section 4 is more fully set out in the Appendix to this judgment, but to assist the  narrative we will set out the parts which are fundamental to the resolution of the issue  in this ap peal:  “4 Definition of “interception”  etc.  Interception in relation to telecommunication systems   (1) For the purposes of this Act, a person intercepts a  communication in the course of its transmission by means of a  telecommunication system if, and only if —  (a) the person does a relevant act in relation to the system,  and  (b) the effect of the relevant act is to make any content of  the communication available, at a relevant time, to a person  who is not the sender or intended recipient of the  communication.   For the meaning of “content” in relation to a communication, see  section 261(6).   (2) In this section “relevant act”, in relation to a  telecommunication system, means —  (a) modifying, or interfering with, the system or its  operation;   (b) monitoring transmissi ons made by means of the system;   (c) monitoring transmissions made by wireless telegraphy  to or from apparatus that is part of the system.   (3) For the purposes of this section references to modifying a  telecommunication system include references to attachi ng any  apparatus to, or otherwise modifying or interfering with —  (a) any part of the system, or   (b) any wireless telegraphy apparatus used for making  transmissions to or from apparatus that is part of the system.   (4) In this section “relevant time”, in rel ation to a communication  transmitted by means of a telecommunication system, means —  (a) any time while the communication is being transmitted,  and  (b) any time when the communication is stored in or by the  system (whether before or after its transmission). ”  26. This definition of interception applies for the purposes of the offence creating provision,  section 3.  The policy of the 2016 Act is that all conduct caught within the section 4  definition should be criminal, unless done lawfully under an appropriate wa rrant and  by an appropriate person.  This includes an act whose effect is to make content of  communications available to a third party both “while the communication is being  transmitted” (section 4(4)(a)) and “any time when” it “is stored in or by the syst em”  (section 4(4)(b)).  However, as we have seen, in relation to “stored” communications a  different policy as to secrecy applies.  There is no necessary connection between these  two policies.  An act may be criminalised, and its nature and product may als o be  protected from disclosure, or it may be criminalised and there need be no such  protection.  These are policy decisions for Parliament.   Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      27. It was agreed between the parties before us and before the judge that for the purposes  of section 4(4), a communication at the time of the “relevant act” must be either “being  transmitted” or “stored in or by the system (whether before or after its transmission)”.   Section 4(1) says that in either case the communication is “in the course of its  transmission” a t the time of its interception.  We shall return to this agreed position  later in this judgment.   28. The prosecution has submitted that the exclusionary regime in section 56 does not, on  a true construction of the whole of the 2016 Act, apply to material obtai ned under a Part  5 warrant issued under section 99 of the 2016 Act.  They submit that the exclusionary  regime applies only to material obtained under Part 2 warrants for interception of the  kind which cannot be authorised by a Part 5 warrant.  Mr. Kinnear,  Q.C, for the  prosecution, called this “old school” interception, which would include phone tapping  resulting in telephone conversations being overheard while they were taking place.  We  shall deal with that submission below, without setting out or summari sing here all the  parts of the 2016 Act on which Mr. Kinnear relied.   The conclusions of the judge   29. The key question was whether at the relevant time the communications were “being  transmitted” or were “stored in or by the telecommunication system.” The judge found  the latter to be the case.  The EncroChat messages were properly regarded as falling  within section 4(4)(b) of the 2016 Act and they had been obtained in accordance with  a Targeted Equipment Interference warrant .  He decided that for the follow ing reasons :  i) At the relevant time when the messages were made available they were not  “being transmitted;” it was clear from the evidence in relation to the data  exfiltrated from the receiving device that the data was not made available whilst  being transm itted. The incorporation of the nickname for the sender from the  data held in the receiver’s device demonstrated that the transmission process of  the data had finished. The judge indicated that he had no trouble in concluding  that the EncroChat data was no t being transmitted at the time that it was taken  and was properly to be regarded as “stored in or by the system (whether before  or after transmission)” and subject to section 4(4)(b) of the 2016 Act. The judge  ruled that he did not consider that the disti nction between RAM and Realm as  described by the defence experts equated to the distinction between “being  transmitted” and being “stored” as set out in the statutory provisions. The  defence approach sought to extend  the notion of transmission well beyond  anything which was contemplated by the 2016 Act .   ii) The Equipment Interference Code of Practice was published pursuant to  Schedule 7 of the 2016 Act and was admissible as evidence in criminal  proceedings.  It addressed the exercise of functions under Part 5 of the 2016  Act  and the authorisation of Targeted Equipment Interference warrants and their  operation.  The judge considered that these provisions from this Code of Practice  were consistent with the conclusions that he had already made in relation to this  issue.   iii) Having considered the provisions of section 99 of the 2016 Act, which contained  the power to make a Targeted Equipment Interference warrant and the scope of  such a warrant, the judge decided that the interceptions were carried out in Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      accordance with  the warrant that had been obtained. The warrant application  accurately described the way in which the implant was to operate and the  warrant authorised what was then done. This was a finding of fact set out in  paragraphs 161 and 162 of the judge’s ruling.   It was a finding of fact to which  he was entitled to come, and there is no challenge to it in this appeal.  On the  contrary, before us Mr. Ryder, Q.C., making submissions on behalf of all  appellants, relies on it in support of his submission that the war rant was a request  to the French authorities for the purposes of his argument on sections 9 and 10  of the 2016 Act.   30. In that context, the appellants contended that if the interception was carried out in  accordance with the warrant then the court must conclu de that what occurred was the  National Crime Agency requesting or requiring the JIT “to carry out the interception of  the communications sent by, or intended for, an individual who the person making the  request believes will be in the British Islands at th e time of the interception.”  As such  the activity was subject to the provisions of section 9 of the 2016 Act and a Targeted  Interception warrant should have been in place. The judge rejected this submission: the  National Crime Agency could not require the French authorities to undertake Operation  Emma and had not requested them to do so.  They were intent on pursuing it and would  have executed it any event. They implanted malware in all EncroChat devices wherever  they were located.   This would affect device s in the United Kingdom.   A “request” to  do this was unnecessary, and none was made.  In addition, on its proper construction,  the judge held that section 9 of the 2016 Act was only applicable to requests for the  interception of material and not to equipm ent interference, therefore it was of no  application to the present case.   31. The judge also rejected the further alternative contention by the appellants that the  provisions of section 10 and therefore section 56(2)(c) of the 2016 Act were engaged  in the pre sent case. The European Investigation Order was not requesting assistance in  relation to communications but rather seeking “information already in the possession  of the executing authority” on the basis that the French authorities were going to  undertake t he operation in any event. The judge also ruled that the scope of section  10(2) could not be narrowed to permit the defence interpretation that this only applied  to a court order.   32. The judge ruled that the EncroChat data w ere admissible evidence and that t he  exclusionary provisions of section 56 of the Act did not apply. There had been detailed  argument about what the position would be were the court to find that the data fell  within section 4(4)(a) of the Act. The appellants submitted that there would have  been  an offence under section 3(1) of the Act, that section 56(2)(a) would apply and the  EncroChat material would be inadmissible. The prosecution submitted that such an  offence would not have been committed as the interception had not been “carried out  in the United Kingdom” as required by section 3(1)(b) of the 2016 Act, given that by  section 4(8) this required that the relevant act  be “carried out by conduct within the  United Kingdom.”  The judge rejected the appellants’ submissions.  He ruled that it w as  necessary to pay close attention to the language used in section 4 to define the term  “interception” and in particular the definition of when interception was to be considered  as having been carried out in the United Kingdom for the purpose of the defin ition set  out in section 4(8)(a). This requires “conduct within the United Kingdom” by which  the relevant act  is “carried out”.  The judge described this as a “bespoke” definition, Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      which he contrasted with the approach taken to the place where conduct occu rs for the  purposes of determining the geographical jurisdiction of the criminal court.  He held  that the relevant conduct in this case, namely the modifying or interference with the  EncroChat system, occurred in France when action was taken there which af fected the  servers which were also there.   The challenge on appeal   33. The appellants have jointly lodged Grounds of Appeal.  They challenge four rulings by  the judge, complaining that each of these rulings was wrong.  They are:   “(1) The ruling that the EncroChat communications were not  intercepted while they were being transmitted (within s4(4)(a) of  the 2016 Act ), but were intercepted while they were stored  before or after transmission, (within the definition of s4(4)(b).   (2) The  ruling that, in the alternative to (1), s56(2)(a), (relating  to the offence under s3 of the 2016 Act), could not apply,  because the interceptions were not carried out by conduct in the  UK, as defined by s4(8) of the Act.   (3) The ruling that s56(2)(c), rel ating to the restriction on  requesting mutual assistance in s10 of the Act, does not apply,  because the E uropean Investigation Order made no request that  fell within s10(1)(a) or, in the alternative, the request in the EIO  was the exercise of a statutory p ower for the purposes of  s10(2A).   (4) The ruling that s56(2)(b), relating to the prohibition on an  overseas authority to carry out the interception of  communications imposed by s9 of the 2016 Act, did not apply  because the JIT’s activity, while ‘in accorda nce with the  Targeted Equipment Interference warrant’ was nevertheless not  pursuant to a request by UK authorities to carry out the  interception.”   The submissions of the parties on the appeal   The appellants   34. Mr. Ryder on behalf of all appellants for the pur poses of this appeal set out a series of  factual propositions which we summarise:   i) The interceptions were effected by malware which was implanted onto phones  in the United Kingdom.  They were being used entirely to communicate with  other phones in the Unite d Kingdom.  The Targeted Equipment Interference  warrants and the European Investigation Order were all in force before the  interception started.  There was a delay between the transmission of the message  and its receipt by the NCA which was sometimes a few  hours, sometimes much  less and sometimes as short as 20 minutes.  There were admissions about this  before the judge, which we have seen.  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      ii) It is not known when or how the malware extracted the messages.  There was  no evidence about this.  No -one who gave ev idence knew exactly how the  malware works, and the French authorities were concerned that this should  continue to be the case.  He said that the burden of the evidence was that the  communications were extracted from the RAM of the devices.  In the case of  the sender this was probably after the user had pressed “Send”.  In the case of  the recipient it was after the message had arrived on the machine but before the  recipient was able to view it.  He provided us with references to the evidence to  make this goo d.  iii) The Targeted Equipment Interference warrant was obtained and approved by  the Investigatory Powers Commissioner because the National Crime Agency  was concerned that otherwise there was a risk that it would be complicit in an  offen ce under the Computer Mi suse Act 1990.   35. Relying on the agreed position of the parties that section 4(4) should be construed as  meaning that if a communication was “being transmitted” it could not be “stored by or  in the system” at the same time, Mr. Ryder submitted that the expert  evidence meant  that the communications were extracted while being transmitted and could not therefore  be “stored” within section 4(4)(b).  He complained that the judge’s ruling does not  define when transmission begins and ends.  He described the approach of the judge as  being that if the communication came from RAM then it was being stored and not  transmitted.  He said that transmission must start when the user presses “send” and ends  when the communication is accessible by a human recipient.  It is not ac cessible by a  human recipient when it is in RAM.  Precisely when transmission begins and ends will  depend on the nuances of the system.   36. Mr. Ryder then identified what he called “Five Steps” to his argument, although with  respect to him, they can be condens ed a little.  The points he made appeared to us to be  these:   i) He reviewed cases decided under previous statutory regimes, which are  summarised in R v. Coulson [2014] 1 WLR 1 119, and Coulson  itself.   These  were not only decided under different regimes, but also concerned different  forms of communication, quite commonly telephone calls.   ii) Then he took us to the European Directives discussed at paragraphs [29] -[43] of  Coulson .  As the court there observed, the Directives include material, including  Recitals 22 a nd 27, which seek to define their objective and include some  material which may assist.   iii) Mr. Ryder criticised the passage in paragraph 153 of the judge’s ruling set out  above which, he said, showed that the judge had no clear definition of  transmission.  Hi s observation that the communications were not taken when the  message was being transmitted from the sender’s device to that of the receiver  appeared to suggest that he adopted a definition of “transmission” which was  inconsistent with the authorities.  He  argued that it has never been held that  “transmission” starts only when the communication leaves the sending device  by means of its “transmitter”.  He also submitted that the judge had regarded the  length of time when the communication might be in RAM as relevant, when it Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      is not, and had in any event not fully reflected the evidence which was given on  that question.   iv) As appears from paragraphs 148 and 153 of the ruling the judge concluded that  the application of a nickname to the communication by the receiving phone must  mark a point by which transmission had ended.  That is because the nickname  is not part of the communication and is held in the database of the receiving  phone.  It is applied to the communication by processing while the  communication is in RAM.  Mr. Ryder took us through the expert evidence on  this issue which was largely dealt with in cross -examination of Mr. Campbell  by Mr. Kinnear.  The point is made that in the case of a telephone call, the name  of the caller appears on the recipie nt’s screen before the call starts.  It is  suggested that the judge gave too much weight to this point which, in truth, was  irrelevant.   37. We have set out a summary of Mr. Ryder’s oral submissions, and we also have in mind  the way in which the arguments were presented before the judge and in writing before  us.  38. By Ground 2, Mr. Ryder submitted that the judge erred in identifying a “bespoke” or  exceptional interpretation of the word “conduct” in section 4(8) of the 2016 Act which  is inconsistent w ith its established meaning in common law and how it should be  interpreted in relation to criminal offences.  He relied on the speech of Lord Hope in  Office of the King’s Prosecutor, Brussels v. Cando Armas and anothe r [2006] 2 AC 1  at paragraph [30] in su pport of his submission that the phrase “conduct within the  United Kingdom” found in section 4(8)(a) of the 2016 Act should be construed to  include conduct whose impact was felt in the United Kingdom, even if it was actually  carried out entirely abroad.  H e submitted that otherwise a phone hacker could simply  travel to France to listen to the stored messages (taking the facts of Coulson as an  example) and avoid criminal liability.   39. Mr. Ryder and Mr. Bowers Q.C., on behalf of C, both made submissions about Gr ound  3, which concerns the application of section 10 of the 2016 Act, which is set out in the  Appendix at paragraph 5.  The first submission is that the European Investigation Order  was a request for assistance under an EU mutual assistance instrument for assistance in  connection with, or in the form of, the interception of communications.  It is suggested  that this is a broad definition and that the judge was wrong to hold that the European  Investigation Order was not such a request because the French auth orities were going  to implement the interception anyway, and because the request was not for interception  but for its product.  In relation to the exclusion from the requirement for a Part 2 warrant  which appears in sub -section (2A), they submitted that th e Prosecution had first  suggested that the Targeted Equipment Interference warrant was the statutory power  and that this was a concession for the purposes of Ground 3.  They also submitted that  the judge’s ruling that the statutory power was the power to m ake or designate a  European Investigation Order under regulation 7 of the 2017 Regulations involved  circularity and, for that reason, must be wrong.  Mr. Bowers made a supporting  submission, relying in particular on the close way in which the National Crim e Agency  worked with the JIT on this process.   40. By Ground 4 the appellants contend that the prohibition on an overseas authority  carrying out the interception of communications imposed by section 9 of the 2016 Act Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      (Appendix at paragraph 5) did apply because the JIT’s activity, “in accordance with” a  Part 5 warrant, must inevitably have been pursuant to a request by United Kingdom  authorities to carry out the interception.  The request was the warrant with which the  French authorities complied.  They suggest t hat the judge erred in approaching the  question of law under section 9 of the 2016 Act, namely whether the JIT had carried  out the interceptions pursuant to a request from United Kingdom authorities, by giving  particular weight to the suggestion that the J IT would have carried out the interceptions  in the United Kingdom “in any event.”  His analysis is said to have misinterpreted the  legal status of the Targeted Equipment Interference warrant.  It is inherent in this  submission that the 2016 Act created two  different regulatory schemes for the same  conduct, one by section 9 and the other by section 10.  It is submitted that both schemes  must be complied with.  The section 9 scheme requires a warrant under Part 2, even in  a case where section 10(2A) says that  none is necessary.   The Prosecution   41. Mr. Kinnear took his submissions in a different order, and we will set them out in  summary in the order he chose.   42. His first submission was that the prohibition on disclosure and the deployment of  evidence in section 56( 1) of the 2016 Act does not apply to equipment interference  warrants at all.  In advancing that submission he also set out his response to Grounds  2-4.  43. He submitted that even if the communications were taken by the French while they  were “being transmitted ”, this did not amount to interception -related conduct as defined  in section 56(2) of the 2016 Act.  He supported this by a review of the 2016 Act and its  Codes of Practice which, he said, showed that the Part 2 regime deals with “interception  of communica tions” and Part 5 with “equipment interference”.  What was done in this  case, whether it was interception or not, was done by equipment interference.  He  submitted that this involves a different regime under the legislation, which is outside  the exclusiona ry rule in section 56, and which has no equivalent provision.  He said that  section 56 contains no reference to Part 5 or to section 99 and clearly relates to the  warrants which may be issued under section 15 of the 2016 Act.  He summarised the  two differe nt regimes by describing the section 15 regime as “old school” interception,  which was to be contrasted with interception by equipment interference.   44. The Prosecution submitted that nothing done in this case by the National Crime Agency  could amount to an of fence under section 3(1) of the 2016 Act because the National  Crime Agency neither perpetrated nor encouraged any conduct in the United Kingdom.   The common law was varied by the clear terms of section 4(8) of the 2016 Act which  require:   i) a relevant act;   ii) which is carried out by conduct within the United Kingdom; and   iii) in the case of a public telecommunications system, that it is located in the United  Kingdom, see section 261(8) and (9) at Appendix paragraph 9.  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      45. The “relevant act” is the modification of the sys tem, including any wireless telegraphy  apparatus used for making transmissions to or from apparatus that is part of the system.   That may occur anywhere, as long as it involved a telecommunication system located  in the United Kingdom, which provides a serv ice to the public in any one or more parts  of the United Kingdom.  It only falls within the jurisdiction of the United Kingdom i f  it is carried out by conduct within the United Kingdom.  If the location of “conduct” is  determined in the way described by Lo rd Hope in Cando Armas then the requirement  for it would add nothing to the definition of “relevant act”.    46. It was further submitted that the National Crime Agency never sought any “intercept  material” and could not be guilty of intentionally encouraging t he JIT to procure and  supply it.  They believed at all times that the material was Targeted Equipment  Interference material.   47. In relation to Ground 4, dealing with section 9 of the 2016 Act, Mr. Kinnear submitted  that it clearly only applies to Part 2 warra nts for “old school” intercept.  The requirement  for mutual assistance warrants appears only in section 15 of the 2016 Act (Part 2  warrants) and not in section 99 (Part 5 warrants).  Section 9 is to be construed as limited  to cases where a warrant under se ction 15 is required.  The judge accepted this  submission as his third reason for holding that section 9 did not apply to this case.  If it  is right as a matter of statutory construction it is not necessary to consider his first two  reasons.   48. In relation to  Ground 3, the operation of section 10 of the 2016 Act, the prosecution  submitted that the judge was right.  They seek to support paragraph 168 of the ruling  which said:   “The defendants contend that it is important to focus upon the  use of the words “in co nnection with, or in the form of, the  interception of communications” in section 10(1) of the 2016  Act. In their submission this formulation contemplates a breadth  to the application of this section which would bring the EIO  within the scope of the applica tion of section 10, on the basis that  the EIO was at the very least a request “in connection with” the  interception of communications. I am not satisfied that this  phrase is capable of interpretation so as to effectively include  within the scope of the sec tion what are in truth requests for the  data obtained from  an interception after  it has occurred,  and  which  the issuing authority has not requested and over which it  has no control. A perusal of the nature of the questions contained  within section H7 of th e prescribed form, which call for details  of the purpose, duration and technical data involved in a  requested interception, provide some support for this approach.  In my view there is force in the prosecution submissions that this  phrase relates to the kin ds of ancillary information where  interception is being requested covered by article 30 of the  Directive (the article of the Directive which deals with the  interception of telecommunications with the technical assistance  of another Member State) and in par ticular article 30(7) as  follows:  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      “30(7) When issuing an EIO referred to in paragraph 1 or  during the interception, the issuing authority may, where it  has a particular reason to do so, also request a transcription,  decoding, or decrypting of the recording  subject to the  agreement of the executing authority.” ”  49. In the alternative, the judge correctly held that the National Crime Agency issued the  European Investigation Order acting under regulation 7 of the 2017 Regulations and so  section 10(2A) removed the requirement for any additional warrant which would  otherwise have arisen by virtue of section 10(2).   50. Moving finally to Ground 1, Mr. Kinnear relied on paragraph 2 of Schedule 3 to the  Act to permit the admissibility of the material because it had been lawf ully obtained  under section 6(1)(c) because a Targeted Equipment Interference warrant was in place  and the JIT and the National Crime Agency acted in accordance with that warrant.  He  rejected the submission that a communication might be in the process of transmission  forever if the recipient threw away the mobile phone (as Mr Ryder submitted), or lost  the ability to access an email account.  It could not depend upon whether the particular  recipient had the ability to access the message once it had arrived.   He submitted that  the short answer to the appeal is that the messages were not intercepted after they had  left the transmitting phone or before they arrived on the receiving phone.  They had  been extracted when they were stored on those phones.   Discussio n and decision   51. The critical issue which falls for decision is the issue of the construction of section 4(4)  of the 2016 Act.  Given that our starting point is the agreement between the parties that  the handsets are part of the public telecommunications sys tem, the issue is whether the  communications were intercepted while they were being transmitted or while they were  stored in or by the system.  Before embarking on that central issue, we must first deal  with the Crown’s first submission that there was no i nterception -related conduct at all,  summarised at paragraphs [41] -[45] above.  The judge agreed with this proposition, and  dealt with it as a fallback position, in case he was wrong to find that the communications  were stored in or by the system for the pu rposes of section 4(4)(b).   52. It is an important part of that submission that the events which occurred in this case did  not involve, and could not have involved, an offence contrary to section 3(1) of the  2016 Act because the relevant act (modifying or interfering with the system) was not  carried out by conduct within the United Kingdom, see section 4(2) and (8) of the 2016  Act.  This is an argument which arises under Ground 2 but is also essential to the  submission presently under consider ation.  That is because if no offence could be  committed for this reason then admitting the evidence would not disclose that the origin  of the intercepted communication was “interception -related conduct”.  It would not be  conduct by a person within section  56(3) which was, “or in the absence of any lawful  authority would be, an offence under section 3(1)”, see section 56(2)(a).  Equally, the  Crown submitted, the EncroChat material does not disclose any breach of section 9 or  10 which otherwise would amount to interception -related conduct because of section  56(2)(b) and (c).   53. We do not need to determine whether the judge was right to uphold the Crown’s  submission that Targeted Equipment Interference warrants, when they relate to Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      communications, fall outside th e exclusionary rule in section 56(1) of the 2016 Act.   We see the force in the points which are made, but there is a directly relevant statutory  provision which supports a contrary view, and in any event if the Crown succeeds on  Ground 1 that provides an u nassailable route to admissibility.  Paragraph 2 of Schedule  3 sets out an exception to the exclusionary rule in section 56(1), and the two provisions  have to be read together.  The submission that that exception in relation to material  which has been lawf ully obtained under section 6(1)(c) is to be treated as a “belt and  braces” provision is not without difficulty.  That would mean that the exception is  unnecessary because such material would be admissible without it.  It is true that in  very complex statu tes such as the 2016 Act it is sometimes possible to find anomalous  provisions which appear to be unnecessary, but the conclusion that they are should be  a last resort when all attempts to give a meaning to the language chosen by Parliament  have failed.  I n view of our conclusion in relation to Ground 1, to which we next turn,  it is unnecessary to decide the issue concerning the scope of the section 56 exclusionary  rule and further we consider that it would be far better for that potentially complex  questio n to be decided in a case where it is truly necessary to the outcome.   Ground 1: s4(4)(b)   54. On this approach, the admissibility of the material depends upon whether it falls within  section 4(4)(b), because it was intercepted at a time when it was stored in or  by the  system (whether before or after transmission).   55. We do not accept that this issue requires a minute examination of the inner workings of  every system in every case.  Parliament has not chosen to define the “relevant time”  when interception takes place by reference to whether the communication is in the  RAM of the device at the point of the extraction, or whether it is in its permanent storage  database, or by any other technical definition.  Given the speed at which technology  changes, both concepts may become obsolete or be superseded.  The statutory scheme  must work whatever the technical features of the system in question.  The words used  are ordinary English words: “transmission” and “stored”.  The “system” is also defined  in non-technical language.  The task of the court, as the judge correctly said, is to  understand the system and then to decide whether, as a matter of ordinary language, the  communication was being transmitted or stored at the time of extraction.  If the form er,  it is inadmissible. If the latter, it is admissible, provided the appropriate warrant was in  place.  On the findings of the judge the appropriate warrant was in place and the  extraction was carried out in accordance with it.   56. We do not consider that any  of the previous decisions of the court assist in this exercise.   They were all decided under different statutory regimes.  There are important  differences between the provisions concerning stored material in section 2(7) of the  Regulation of Investigatory  Powers Act 2000 and in section 4 of the 2016 Act.  The  lack of any limitation on the exception created by section 4(4)(b) in relation to stored  material is significant.  That change, in our judgment, is relevant to the construction of  section 4 of the 201 6 Ac t.  Perhaps unsurprisingly, the 1985 Act contained no reference  to stored material, and no definition of “transmission” at all.  In 1985 the legislature  was not concerned with modern telecommunications systems and the principal focus  was on telephone c alls.  Cases decided under that regime are of no assistance.  The  legislation has since had to address Council Directive 97/66/EC and Council Directive  2002/58/EC and technical developments both in the systems and in the means used to Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      intercept communicati ons.  The 2016 Act is a new statute , on which there is no relevant  authority and its construction must be approached in that way.   57. Both parties cited Coulson  in which the Court of Appeal said that section 2(7) of the  2000 Act was “at the heart of [that] app eal”.  This provided:   “For the purposes of this section the times while a  communication is being transmitted by means of a  telecommunication system shall be taken to include any time  when the system by means of which the communication is being,  or has been , transmitted is used for storing it in a manner that  enables the intended recipient to collect it or otherwise to have  access to it. ”  58. The 2016 Act, as we have said, adopted a framework in which some components are  similar to those in the 2000 Act.  Sectio n 1 of the 2000 Act was the offence creating  provision which criminalised the interception of communications in the course of their  transmission by a telecommunications system.  Section 17 was the provision which  excluded the product of interception from d isclosure or evidence.  Like section 4 of the  2016 Act, section 2 of the 2000 Act dealt with the meaning and location of  “interception”.  The language, so far as stored communications are concerned, is  significantly different.    59. Section 2(7) of the 2000 Ac t makes it clear, among other things, that the storage which  it describes can be occurring at the same time as the communication is “being  transmitted”.  It also limits the concept of “storage” to storage “in a manner which  enables the intended recipient t o collect it or otherwise have access to it”.  Section 4(4)  does not repeat this limitation, although Mr. Ryder suggested that transmission only  ends when the recipient actually accesses the communication.  In section 4(4), unlike  section 2(7), all forms o f storage are caught, whether or not they enable the intended  recipient to access the communication.  Further, section 2(7) of the 2000 Act is a  “deeming provision”.  The time when a communication is being transmitted is taken to  include times when that co mmunication is also being stored in a relevant manner; by  contrast, section 4(4) is not a deeming provision.  Finally, the scheme of the 2000 Act  so far as warrantry is concerned is entirely different and the word “stored” appears in  the 2016 Act in variou s places which have no equivalent in the 2000 Act and is serving  more purposes than it did in that Act.   60. The answer to this appeal is found in the construction of section 4(1) and (4) (4)(b) of  the 2016 Act.  Section 4(4)(b), read beside section 4(1)(b), mea ns that a message which  is, for example, monitored while it is stored in or by the system by means of which it is  transmitted is intercepted while it is in the course of transmission.  To hold that this  only applies if the message is stored “in a manner th at enables the intended recipient to  collect it or otherwise to have access to it” would be to read words into the 2016 Act  which had appeared in the 2000 Act but which Parliament deliberately omitted.  That  is a reading of section 4(4)(b) which is obvious ly quite unarguable.   It is, however,  essential to the appellants’ argument on Ground 1.  That became explicit when Mr.  Ryder was dealing with storage on the handset of the recipient, in the context of the  judge’s approach to the “nickname” issue.  It als o explains why he was driven to submit  that a communication would be in the course of transmission forever if, for example, it  were sent to an email address to which the intended recipient no longer had access Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      because he or she had forgotten the password.  That does unnecessary violence to the  expression “being transmitted” which is not required by the 2016 Act.   61. Section 4(4)(b) extended the types of storage which amount to being in “the course of  transmission” so as to catch communications which are “stored ” for the purposes of the  offence creating provision, to which the distinction between section 4(4)(a) and 4(4)(b)  is immaterial.  The importance of the distinction lies in the warrantry which is required,  and in the admissibility of the product of lawfull y obtained communications.  The  structure of section 4(4) is important here.  The conjunction which connects section  4(4)(a) and 4(4)(b) is “and” not “or”.  The appellants’ submission that the court must  start with section 4(4)(a) and determine whether a m essage was intercepted while being  transmitted and, if the answer to that is yes, cannot then go on to consider whether it  was also, at the same time, being stored is simply wrong.  The words in the parenthesis  of section 4(4)(b) do not require that conclu sion.  They simply mean that it does not  matter whether the storage began before or after the transmission.  It is unnecessary to  add any words there to catch storage while the communication is being transmitted  because that is necessarily caught by the pl ain words of the provision.   62. As a matter of ordinary language, section 4(4)(b) is clear and unambiguous in its  meaning.  It extends to all communications which are stored on the system, whenever  that might occur.  That broad meaning coheres with the structu re of the 2016 Act  considered in overview, and importantly with the different types of warrantry for which  the Act provides.  Part 5 warrants are required for the interception of stored material,  and Part 2 warrants for material which is to be intercepted while being transmitted.  It  also advances the overall purpose of the legislation in preserving the legislative  framework – and the distinction between the different types of intercept – to which we  have referred.  The statutory question for any court in d etermining if section 4(4)(b)  applies is this: was the communication stored in or by the system at the time when it  was intercepted?   63. The judge’s findings of fact are set out above.  He found that the communications were  extracted directly from the handset of the user and not while they were travelling to,  through or from any other part of the system.  This is a process which is like any other  means of downloading the content of a mobile phone handset.  It is done remotely, but  it is done by interrogating th e RAM of the phone, not by intercepting the  communication after it has left the phone.  In the case of the sender the material was  recovered in the form of unencrypted messages stored in the RAM of the device in a  form in which they existed before they wer e transmitted from the device to the servers  in Roubaix, via the telecommunications system.   This provides the answer to the  statutory question.  The material was stored when it was intercepted.  It was within  section 4(4)(b).   64. Given this conclusion on the  meaning of “stored” it is not necessary to define exactly  when transmission starts and ends.  We do not accept that transmission of the  communication started when the user pressed “Send”.  That was an action which caused  the device to prepare the message in its final form and then to initiate the process of  transmission.  A mobile phone is a computer and a transmitter.  Transmission takes  place after the communication has been put into its final form by the computer.  In the  present case that includes the encryption.  That takes place after the user presses “Send”,  but before the message is transmitted by the device.  On receipt by the recipient’s device  it is decrypted in the RAM and it may be that in some cases a nickname is added to that Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      which has been t ransmitted which is stored in the Realm database on that device. We  consider that the transmission is complete when the communication arrives on the  receiving device so that the device can begin work decrypting it and making it legible.  Even in this unusua l type of system, the transmission occurs, in relation to each  communication, when a device is in contact with the rest of the system for the purpose  of sending or receiving a communication, and when the communication is travelling  through other parts of t he system.    65. The judge’s key finding of fact was set out in the passage of his ruling which we have  underlined in our paragraph [14] above.   66. We agree with the judge.  The communication is that which is transmitted.  What  remains on the device is not what ha s been transmitted, but a copy of it or what, in older  forms of messaging, might be described as a “draft”.  That is so however quickly after  transmission the obtaining of the copy takes place, or even if the copy is extracted while  the original encrypted communication is being transmitted.  The fact that what was  obtained was an unencrypted message, means that what was on the phone, and what  was intercepted, was not the same as what had been transmitted because what had been  transmitted was encrypted.  It cannot therefore have been “being transmitted” when it  was intercepted: it can only have been “being stored”.   67. That being so, the harvesting was interception but was rendered lawful by the Targeted  Equipment Interference warrants issued under section 99 of the Act.  That is the effect  of section 6(1)(c) of the Act.   The product of that harvesting was thus rendered  admissible in these proceedings by paragraph 2 of Schedule 3.  Our conclusion is that  the extracted communications were stored on the handsets.  On the agreed basis that  these formed parts of the public telecommunications system, the communications were  stored in or by that system.   68. We have not found it necessary to set out in this judgment the expert evidence with  which this conclusion is said to b e inconsistent.  The 2016 Act does not use technical  terms in this area.  The experts have an important role in explaining how a system  works, but no role whatever in construing an Act of Parliament.  They appear to have  assumed that because a communicatio n appears in the RAM as an essential part of the  process which results in the transmission it did so while “being transmitted”.  That is  an obvious error of language and analysis.  It can be illustrated by considering the  posting of a letter.  The process involves the letter being written, put in an envelope, a  stamp being attached and then the letter being placed in the post box.  Only the last act  involves the letter being transmitted by a system, but all the acts are essential to that  transmission.   69. That being so, the judge’s conclusion on the Ground 1 issue was right.  If the EncroChat  material was caught by the section 56 exclusion, it was admissible in evidence by this  route.  The communications were lawfully intercepted while stored on the handsets and   are admissible by virtue of paragraph 2 of Schedule 3 to the 2016 Act.   Ground 2: section 4(8)   70. It is unnecessary to consider Ground 2 because that only arises if Ground 1 succeeds.   The prosecution does not need its fallback argument in view of our conclus ion on  Ground 1.  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      Grounds 3 and 4: sections 10 and 9   71. It is necessary to say something about Grounds 3 and 4.  If sections 9 or 10, or both,  were breached by the National Crime Agency, then that would not affect the path to  admissibility in section 6(1)(c) a nd paragraph 2 of Schedule 3.  Compliance with  sections 9 and 10 is not a statutory condition of admissibility by that route.  It might,  however, give rise to an argument that the material should be excluded pursuant to  section 78 of the Police and Crimina l Evidence Act 1984.  It would be a surprising  exercise of that power to exclude evidence which Parliament has provided in clear terms  should be admissible, but we should nevertheless consider these Grounds.   Ground 3: section 10   72. Ground 3 relies on the prohibition in section 10 of the 2016 Act which is said to have  been breached.  It is said that the United Kingdom authorities made a request for  assistance under an EU mutual assistance instrument in connection with the  interception  of communications when there was no mutual assistance warrant in being  under Chapter 1 of Part 2 authorising the making of that request.  That would be a  breach of section 10(2) of the Act.  The judge rejected that submission, holding that  since the JIT w as intending to proceed whatever the United Kingdom authorities did,  there was no request for any interception, only for the product of it.  We prefer not to  base our conclusion on that finding.  It appears to us that the European Investigation  Order in th is case was a request for assistance under an EU mutual assistance instrument  which was “in connection with” the interception of communications.  This is because  of the statutory context of section 10(2A) which we describe below.  Therefore, unless  section  10(2A) applies what was done was done unlawfully because no Part 2 mutual  assistance warrant was in place.  If that were so, then the rule in section 56(1) and 56(2)  (c) would apply and the evidence could not be adduced, unless it was admissible under  paragraph 2 of Schedule 3 to the 2016 Act as we have held it was.  The issue of  unlawfulness turns on section 10(2A).  The judge held under section 10(2A) of the Act  that section 10(2) did not apply because the request which was made was made in the  exercise of a statutory power.  The judge concluded that the statutory power concerned  was the power of a designated prosecutor to make or validate a European Investigation  Order under regulation 7 of the 2017 Regulations.    73. The 2017 Regulations amended the 2016 Act by the addition of section 10(2A), see  paragraph 9 of Schedule 3 to the 2017 Regulations.  Regulation 59 designated the  Directive relating to the European Investigation Order as an EU mutual instrument for  the purposes of section 10 of the 2016 Ac t.  It appears that the purpose of the 2017  Regulations and of section 10(2A) (described as a “consequential amendment”) was  precisely to incorporate the European Investigation Order system into United Kingdom  domestic law.  The Explanatory Memorandum to t he 2017 Regulations says this:   “2.1 The purpose of the Criminal Justice (European  Investigation Order) Regulations 2017 (“the Regulations”) is to  give effect to Directive 2014/41/EU of the European Parliament  and of the Council of 3 April 2014 regarding th e European  Investigation Order in criminal matters (OJ L 130, 1.5.2014, p.  1) (“the Directive”). ” Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      74. It would be inconsistent with that purpose to construe section 10(1) and 10(2A) so  narrowly as to remove from its scope a European Investigation Order of the sort issued  in this case.  The words used are “a request for assistance in connection with, or in the  form of, interception of a communication stored in or by a telecommunications system”  which are broad in their meaning.  In this case, the European Invest igation Order was  made for the purpose of obtaining the results of interception of communications and  that appears to us to be a request for assistance in connection with interception.   75. Just as this statutory context makes it impossible for the Prosecution to argue that the  European Investigation Order was not a “request” for the purposes of section 10, in  exactly the same way it makes it impossible for the appellants to contend that it was not  “the exercise of a statutory power” for the purposes of section 10(2A).  Section 10(2A)  was enacted specifically to include European Investigation Orders.  Ground 3 is without  merit.   Ground 4: section 9   76. Ground 4 relies on the prohibition in section 9 of the 2016 Act against requesting  interception without a Part 2 targ eted interception or examination warrant being in  place.   There was no warrant of this kind, and unlike section 10, section 9 contains no  provision dealing with communications which are stored in or by the system.  The  appellants therefore contend that ac tivity which was rendered lawful by the clear terms  of section 6(1)(c) and 10(2A) of the Act was rendered unlawful by section 9, which  does not refer to stored communications at all.  That would be an extraordinary  outcome.    77. The judge dealt with the secti on 9 issue on the basis that there was, in fact, no request  to carry out the interception of communications for broadly the same reasons as applied  in relation to the section 10 issue.  We do not consider it necessary to review the judge’s  determination of  the facts.  Whether he was right or wrong about this conclusion, he  also ruled against the appellants as a matter of law on the construction of section 9.  He  said at paragraph 165:   “……it is clear that on its proper construction, section 9 of the  2016 Act  is applicable to requests for the interception of  Targeted Interception material and not Targeted Equipment  Interference material, and it is therefore of no application in the  present circumstances. Firstly, the reference to interception of  communications  in section 9 of the 2016 Act is a cross -reference  to interception of communications governed by Part 2 and  section 15 of the 2016 Act. This is reinforced by the reference in  section 9(2) to the need for targeted interception warrants under  Part 2 of the A ct: the clear intention of this section is to prevent  the circumvention of the regulation of Part 2 activity by the  commissioning of overseas authorities to carry it out in the UK  on behalf of the UK authorities. As set out above, the powers  created by sec tion 99 of the 2016 Act in relation to Targeted  Equipment Interference material include obtaining assistance in  relation to giving effect to the Targeted Equipment Interference  warrant, and that provision is not limited in its geographical  reach. To read s ection 9 as applying to conduct covered by a Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      Targeted Equipment Interference warrant would cut across the  breadth of the authority given under section 99(5), and would  require the obtaining of a Targeted Interception warrant in  relation to conduct involvin g Targeted Equipment Interference  material. This would not sit well with the structure of the  legislation which clearly provides separate regimes for Targeted  Interception and Targeted Equipment Interference material.”   78. We agree with the judge that section 9 of the 2016 Act should be construed so that it is  restricted to prohibiting the requesting of a foreign state to carry out interception which  would require a Part 2 Targeted Interception warrant if carried out in the United  Kingdom by the United Kingdom authorities, unless such a warrant is in place.  The  position which applies if the request is made under an EU mutual assistance instrument  or an international mutual assistance agreement is governed by section 10 so far as the  assistance is in connection with or in the form of the interception of communications.   That provision by necessary implication requires section 9 to be construed so that it  does not apply to cases within section 10.  It governs only a “request” made by means  other than an EU mutual assistance instrument or an international mutual assistance  agreement.  This was not such a case.   Conclusion   79. We have concluded that the only substantial question which the judge was required to  answer was whether the EncroChat material was stored by or in the telecommunications  system when it was intercepted.  Like him, we consider that these communications were  not being transmitted but stored at that time.  That being so, the appeal is dismissed.     Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      APPENDIX: STATUTORY PROVISIONS FROM INVESTIGATORY POWERS ACT  2016   1. The scheme is described in this Appendix so far as it relates to public  telecommunications systems.   2. Section 3 makes it an offence to intercept a communication in the course of its  transmission by a public telecommunications system, if the intercep tion is carried out  in the United Kingdom and it is done without lawful authority.    3 Offence of unlawful interception   (1) A person commits an offence if —  (a) the person intentionally intercepts a communication in  the course of its transmission by means of —  (i) a public telecommunication system,   (ii) a private telecommunication system, or   (iii) a public postal service,   (b) the interception is carried out in the United Kingdom,  and  (c) the person does not have lawful authority to carry out the  interception.   ……….   (3) Sections 4 and 5 contain provision about —  (a) the meaning of “interception”, and   (b) when interception is to be regarded as carried out in the  United Kingdom.   (4) Section 6 contains provision about when a person has lawful  authority to carry out an interception.   (5) For the meaning of the terms used in subsection (1)(a)(i) to  (iii), see sections 261 and 262.     …………………….   3. Section 4 defines interception and some other terms.  So far as relevant it provides:   4 Definition of “interception”  etc.  Interception in relation to telecommunication systems  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      (1) For the purposes of this Act, a person intercepts a  communication in the course of its transmission by means of a  telecommunication system if, and only if —  (a) the person does a relevant act in relation to the system,  and  (b) the effect of the relevant act is to make any content of  the communication available, at a relevant time, to a person  who is not the sender or intended recipient of the  communication.   For the meaning of “cont ent” in relation to a communication, see  section 261(6).   (2) In this section “relevant act”, in relation to a  telecommunication system, means —  (a) modifying, or interfering with, the system or its  operation;   (b) monitoring transmissions made by means of th e system;   (c) monitoring transmissions made by wireless telegraphy  to or from apparatus that is part of the system.   (3) For the purposes of this section references to modifying a  telecommunication system include references to attaching any  apparatus to, or  otherwise modifying or interfering with —  (a) any part of the system, or   (b) any wireless telegraphy apparatus used for making  transmissions to or from apparatus that is part of the  system.   (4) In this section “relevant time”, in relation to a communication  transmitted by means of a telecommunication system, means —  (a) any time while the communication is being transmitted,  and  (b) any time when the communication is stored in or by the  system (whether before or after its transmission).   (5) For th e purposes of this section, the cases in which any  content of a communication is to be taken to be made available  to a person at a relevant time include any case in which any of  the communication is diverted or recorded at a relevant time so  as to make any  content of the communication available to a  person after that time.  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      (6) In this section “wireless telegraphy” and “wireless telegraphy  apparatus” have the same meaning as in the Wireless Telegraphy  Act 2006 (see sections 116 and 117 of that Act).   Intercep tion in relation to postal services   (7)………….   Interception carried out in the United Kingdom   (8) For the purposes of this Act the interception of a  communication is carried out in the United Kingdom if, and only  if—  (a) the relevant act or, in the case of a  postal item, the  interception is carried out by conduct within the United  Kingdom, and   (b) the communication is intercepted —  (i) in the course of its transmission by means of a  public telecommunication system or a public postal  service, or   (ii) in the cou rse of its transmission by means of a  private telecommunication system in a case where the  sender or intended recipient of the communication is  in the United Kingdom.   4. Section 6 defines “lawful authority”.  The key provision for this case is 6(1)(c), which  provides that interception of stored communications (to which s4(4)(b) applies) under  a Part 5 warrant is lawful.  Paragraph 2 of Schedule 3 below renders product within that  category admissible by excluding it from section 56.   6. Definition of “lawful aut hority”   (1) For the purposes of this Act, a person has lawful authority to  carry out an interception if, and only if —  (a) the interception is carried out in accordance with —  (i) a targeted interception warrant  or mutual  assistance warrant under Chapter 1 of Part 2, or   (ii) a bulk interception warrant under Chapter 1 of  Part 6,   (b) the interception is authorised by any of sections 44 to  52, or   (c) in the case of a communication stored in or by a  telecommunicatio n system, the interception — Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      (i) is carried out in accordance with a targeted  equipment interference warrant under Part 5 or a bulk  equipment interference warrant under Chapter 3 of Part  6,  (ii) is in the exercise of any statutory power that is  exercised for the purpose of obtaining information or  taking possession of any document or other property, or   (iii) is carried out in accordance with a court order  made for that purpose.   (2) …….   (3)  …….    5. Sections 9 and 10 impose restrictions on requesting  interception by overseas  authorities, and on requesting assistance under mutual legal assistance agreements.   The principle is that such requests must be authorised by appropriate warrants in  accordance with the scheme of the Act.   9 Restriction on request ing interception by overseas  authorities   (1) This section applies to a request for any authorities of a  country or territory outside the United Kingdom to carry out  the interception of communications sent by, or intended for,  an individual who the person makin g the request believes  will be in the British Islands at the time of the interception.   (2) A request to which this section applies may not be made by  or on behalf of a person in the United Kingdom unless —  (a) a targeted interception warrant has been issued under  Chapter 1 of Part 2 authorising the person to whom it is  addressed to secure the interception of communications sent  by, or intended for, that individual, or   (b) a targeted examination warrant has been issued under  that Chapter authorising the person to whom it  is addressed  to carry out the selection of the content of such  communications for examination.    10  Restriction on requesting assistance under mutual  assistance agreements etc.   (1) This section applies to —  (a) a request for assistance under an EU mutual assis tance  instrument, and  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      (b) a request for assistance in accordance with an international  mutual assistance agreement   so far as the assistance is in connection with, or in the form of,  the interception of communications.   (2) A request to which this section appli es may not be made by  or on behalf of a person in the United Kingdom to the competent  authorities of a country or territory outside the United Kingdom  unless a mutual assistance warrant has been issued under  Chapter 1 of Part 2 authorising the making of th e request.   (2A) Subsection (2) does not apply in the case of a request for  assistance in connection with, or in the form of, interception of a  communication stored in or by a telecommunication system if  the request is made —  (a) in the exercise of a statutory power that is exercised for  the purpose of obtaining information or taking possession of  any document or other property, or   (b) in accordance with a court order that is made for that  purpose.   (3) In this section —      “EU mutual assistance instrument” mea ns an EU instrument  which —      (a)    relates to the provision of mutual assistance in  connection with, or in the form of, the interception of  communications,       (b)    requires the issue of a warrant, order or equivalent  instrument in cases in which assistance is given, and       (c)    is designated as an EU mutual assistance instrument  by regulations made by the Secretary of State;   “international mutual assistance agreement” means an  international agreement which —      (a)    relates to the provision of mutual assistance in  connecti on with, or in the form of, the interception of  communications,       (b)    requires the issue of a warrant, order or equivalent  instrument in cases in which assistance is given, and       (c)    is designated as an international mutual assistance  agreement b y regulations made by the Secretary of State.  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      6. The rule against admissibility in court proceedings is found in section 56 and  schedule 3 to the Act.   56 Exclusion of matters from legal proceedings etc.   (1) No evidence may be adduced, question asked, assertio n or  disclosure made or other thing done in, for the purposes of or in  connection with any legal proceedings or Inquiries Act  proceedings which (in any manner) —  (a) discloses, in circumstances from which its origin in  interception -related conduct may be in ferred —  (i) any content of an intercepted communication, or   (ii) any secondary data obtained from a communication,  or  (b) tends to suggest that any interception -related conduct  has or may have occurred or may be going to occur.   This is subject to Schedule 3 (exceptions).   (2) “Interception -related conduct ” means —  (a) conduct by a person within subsection (3) that is, or in  the absence of any lawful authority would be, an offence  under section 3(1) (offence of unlawful interception);   (b) a breach of the prohibition imposed by section 9  (restriction on requesting interception by overseas  authorities);   (c) a breach of the prohibition imposed by section 10  (restriction on requesting assistance under mutual assistance  agreements etc.);   (d) the making of an ap plication by any person for a  warrant, or the issue of a warrant, under Chapter 1 of this  Part;   (e) the imposition of any requirement on any person to  provide assistance in giving effect to a targeted interception  warrant or mutual assistance warrant.   (3) The persons referred to in subsection (2)(a) are —  (a) any person who is an intercepting authority (see section  18);  (b) any person holding office under the Crown;  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      (c) any person deemed to be the proper officer of Revenue  and Customs by virtue of section 8( 2) of the Customs and  Excise Management Act 1979;   (d) any person employed by, or for the purposes of, a police  force;   (e) any postal operator or telecommunications operator;   (f) any person employed or engaged for the purposes of the  business of a postal operator or telecommunications  operator.   (4) Any reference in subsection (1) to interception -related  conduct also includes any conduct taking place before the  coming into force of this section and consisting of —  (a) conduct by a person within subsec tion (3) that —  (i) was an offence under section 1(1) or (2) of the  Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (“RIPA”),  or      (ii) would have been such an offence in the absence of  any lawful authority (within the meaning of section 1(5)  of RIPA);   (b) cond uct by a person within subsection (3) that —  (i) was an offence under section 1 of the Interception of  Communications Act 1985, or   (ii) would have been such an offence in the absence of subsections (2)  and (3) of that section;   (c) a breach by the Secretary of State of the duty under  section 1(4) of RIPA (restriction on requesting assistance  under mutual assistance agreements);   (d) the making of an application by any person for a  warrant, or the issue of a warrant, under —  (i) Chapter 1 of Part 1 of RIPA, or   (ii) the Interception of Communications Act 1985;  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      (e) the imposition of any requirement on any person to  provide assistance in giving effect to a warrant under  Chapter 1 of Part 1 of RIPA.   (5) In this section —  “Inquiries Act  proceedings ” means proceedings of an  inquiry under the Inquiries Act 2005;   “intercepted communication ” means any  communication intercepted in the course of its  transmission by means of a postal service or  telecommunication system.   7. Schedule 3 to the Act co ntains a number of exceptions to the operation of the  exclusionary rule in section 56(1) in certain classes of proceedings.    SCHEDULE 3   Exceptions to section 56   Introductory   1 This Schedule contains —  (a) exceptions to the exclusion by section 56(1) of certain  matters from legal proceedings, and   (b) limitations on those exceptions where that exclusion  will still apply.   Disclosures of lawfully intercepted communications   2 (1) Section 56(1)(a) does not prohibit the disclosure of any  content of a communicat ion, or any secondary data obtained  from a communication, if the interception of that communication  was lawful by virtue of any of the following provisions —  (a) sections 6(1)(c) and 44 to 52;   (b) sections 1(5)(c), 3 and 4 of the Regulation of  Investigatory  Powers Act 2000;   (c) section 1(2)(b) and (3) of the Interception of  Communications Act 1985.   (2) Where any disclosure is proposed to be, or has been, made  on the grounds that it is authorised by sub -paragraph (1), section  56(1) does not prohibit the doing  of anything in, or for the  purposes of, so much of any proceedings as relates to the  question whether that disclosure is or was so authorised.  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      8. Section 99 in Part 5 of the Act deals with the kind of warrants which were granted  in this case, a Targeted Equi pment Interference warrant.  It is as follows: -  99 Warrants under this Part: general   (1) There are two kinds of warrants which may be issued under  this Part —  (a) targeted equipment interference warrants (see  subsection (2));   (b) targeted examination warrants (see subsection (9)).   (2) A targeted equipment interference warrant is a warrant which  authorises or requires the person to whom it is addressed to  secure interference with any equipment for the purpose of  obtaining —  (a) communications  (see section 135);   (b) equipment data (see section 100);   (c) any other information.   (3) A targeted equipment interference warrant —  (a) must also authorise or require the person to whom it is  addressed to secure the obtaining of the communications,  equipme nt data or other information to which the warrant  relates;   (b) may also authorise that person to secure the disclosure,  in any manner described in the warrant, of anything obtained  under the warrant by virtue of paragraph (a).   (4) The reference in subsecti ons (2) and (3) to the obtaining of  communications or other information includes doing so by —  (a) monitoring, observing or listening to a person's  communications or other activities;   (b) recording anything which is monitored, observed or  listened to.   (5) A targeted equipment interference warrant also authorises the  following conduct (in addition to the conduct described in the  warrant) —  (a) any conduct which it is necessary to undertake in order  to do what is expressly authorised or required by the warrant,  including conduct for securing the obtaining of  communications, equipment data or other information;  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      (b) any conduct by any person which is conduct in  pursuance of a requirement imposed by or on behalf of the  person to whom the warrant is addresse d to be provided with  assistance in giving effect to the warrant.   (6) A targeted equipment interference warrant may not, by virtue  of subsection (3), authorise or require a person to engage in  conduct, in relation to a communication other than a stored  communication, which would (unless done with lawful  authority) constitute an offence under section 3(1) (unlawful  interception).   (7) Subsection (5)(a) does not authorise a person to engage in  conduct which could not be expressly authorised under the  warrant b ecause of the restriction imposed by subsection (6).   (8) In subsection (6), “ stored communication ” means a  communication stored in or by a telecommunication system  (whether before or after its transmission).     …………..   (11) Any conduct which is carried out i n accordance with a  warrant under this Part is lawful for all purposes.   9. There are definition sections.  In Part 5, section 135 defines, among other things  “communications” for the purposes of that Part of the Act.  Section 261 contains  “telecommunications definitions”.  The definitions which may be relevant in this  case are set out below.   261 Telecommunications definitions   (1) The definitions in this section have effect for the purposes of  this Act.   Communication   (2) “Communication ”, in relation to a telecommunications  operator, telecommunications service or telecommunication  system, includes —  (a) anything comprising speech, music, sounds, visual  images or data of any description, and   (b) signals serving either for the impartation of anything  between p ersons, between a person and a thing or between  things or for the actuation or control of any apparatus.   Entity data   ………………  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  A, B, D & C -v- Regina      Events data   ………………   Communications data   ………………   Content of a communication   (6) “Content ”, in relation to a communication and a  telecommunications operator, telecommunications service or  telecommunication system, means any element of the  communication, or any data attached to or logically associated  with the communication, which reveals anyth ing of what might  reasonably be considered to be the meaning (if any) of the  communication, but —  (a) any meaning arising from the fact of the communication  or from any data relating to the transmission of the  communication is to be disregarded, and   (b) anything which is systems data is not content.   Other definitions   …………   (8) “Public telecommunications service ” means any  telecommunications service which is offered or provided to the  public, or a substantial section of the public, in any one or more  parts of the United Kingdom.   (9) “Public telecommunication system ” means a  telecommunication system located in the United Kingdom —  (a) by means of which any public telecommunications  service is provided, or   (b) which consists of parts of any other telecommunication  system by means of which any such service is provided.   …………………..   (13) “Telecommunication system ” means a system (including  the apparatus comprised in it) that exists (whether wholly or  partly in the United Kingdom or elsewhere) for the pu rpose of  facilitating the transmission of communications by any means  involving the use of electrical or electromagnetic energy.   ………………….  