       Neutral Citation Number: [2021] EWCA Crim 200     IN THE COURT OF APPEAL ( CRIMINAL  DIVISION)   ON APPEAL FROM THE CENTRAL CRIMINAL COURT   HER HONOUR JUDGE DHIR QC   201903944A2   AND IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE   QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION   ADMINISTRATIVE COURT   CO/5082/2019     Royal Courts of Justice   Strand, London, WC2A 2LL     Date: 19/02/2021   Before :     PRESIDENT OF THE QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION   MRS JUSTICE CUTTS   and  MR JUSTICE SAINI   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Between :      KL Applican t   - and -    REGINA  Respondent     - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -    Michael Bromley -Martin QC & Joanne Cecil  (instructed by Stokoe Partnership ) for the  Applicant   Anthony Orchard QC & Joel Smith  (instructed by  CPS Criminal Appeals Unit ) for the  Respondent     Hearing date: 24 November 2020   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Approved Judgment     Covid -19 Protocol: This judgment was handed down remotely by circulation to the parties’  representatives by email, release to BAILII and publication on the Courts and Tribunals  Judiciary website. The date and time for hand -down is deemed to be 10:00am on Friday 19  February 2021.     Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      Dame Victoria Sharp P.    Introduction   1. This is judgment of the court.   2. On 6 September 2019, KL (the applicant) was convicted following a trial at the Central  Criminal Court before a jury and Her Honour Judge Dhir QC, of the murder of Ayub  Hassan, aged 17. At the date of the murder, the applicant was 15 years old. By the time  of conviction on 6 September 2019 he was aged 16.   3. Before trial, on 12 June 2019, an order had been made under section 45(3) of the Youth  Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999 (the 1999 Act) providing for the applicant to  remain anonymous. The order provided that no matter relating to the applicant should  (while he is under the age of 18) be included in any publication if it was likely to lead  members of the public to identify him as a person concerned in the criminal  proceedings.   4. On the morning of th e sentencing hearing on 27 September 2019, a media  representative made an application to the judge for the removal of that order. Following  submissions from that representative and from Leading Counsel for the applicant, Mr  Bromley -Martin QC, the judge acc eded to that application. The judge made what is  called an excepting direction under section 45(4) of the 1999 Act, thereby permitting  the press to name the applicant (the Excepting Direction).    5. As to sentence, the judge imposed upon the applicant the man datory sentence of  Detention During Her Majesty’s Pleasure pursuant to section 90 of the Powers of  Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 and determined that the minimum term was to  be 15 years.   6. The Excepting Direction was stayed by the judge pending the a pplications to this court,  which is sitting both as the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division and as a Divisional  Court.   7. In summary, the applicant argues, both by way of an appeal to the Court of Appeal,  Criminal Division and by way of a parallel claim for j udicial review in the Divisional  Court, that the making of the Excepting Direction was unlawful.   8. As part of his appeal to the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division, the applicant makes a  separate application for leave to appeal against the 15 -year minimum te rm, contending  that it was manifestly excessive.   9. The applications before us in relation to the Excepting Direction require us to resolve  the point left open in R v Aziz (Ayman)  [2019] EWCA Crim 1568 at paras 51 to 57.  That is, whether the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division enjoys a concurrent jurisdiction  with the Divisional Court in challenges to the making of such directions. Both the  applicant and the Crown are agreed that judicial review is available and that there exists  a concurrent jurisdiction in th e Court of Appeal, Criminal Division to consider the  legality of the Excepting Direction. The parties also agree that this jurisdiction on the  part of the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division is engaged once an applicant has applied Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      for leave to appeal again st conviction and sentence, and irrespective of the outcome of  any such application.   10. In addition to valuable submissions from the Counsel for the parties, including excellent  written submissions on jurisdiction from Junior Counsel, Ms Cecil and Mr Smith, w e  were assisted by oral arguments from Mr Sam Tobin on behalf of PA Media, and a  detailed written submission from Mr Dodd, on behalf of PA Media and News Central.     The Facts   11. On Thursday 7 March 2018 at about 2pm, in the Marzell House alleyway at the juncti on  of North End Road with Lanfrey Place, London W14, Ayub Hassan was stabbed once  in the chest by the applicant. The “through and through” injury penetrated Ayub  Hassan’s heart. Although Ayub Hassan received extensive medical treatment at the  scene, he was  pronounced dead in hospital at 4pm.   12. The events before, after and during, the stabbing were clearly captured on CCTV  footage, which we have viewed . The footage shows the deceased and his friend (Idris  Mohammed) arriving in North End Road at about 12 noon a nd later entering the  alleyway with three others. Other males came and went and during this time the  deceased is seen with a knife which he placed into an internal pocket of his clothing.  Another knife (described as a large “Zombie” knife) was placed into a storage cupboard  off camera. Idris Mohammed was also seen to pick something up or secrete something  in bushes nearby.   13. The applicant and Elijah Oweyo arrived in the North End Road by taxi at 1.57pm. They  were joined by other youths (Amrou Greenridge on a “Boris bike”, Tajorn Brown and  Idris Mohammed, who had previously been with the deceased). After visiting a café  and supermarket, this group entered the alleyway where they appeared to be socialising  with the other group.   14. The footage shows that the applic ant and deceased then began a discussion. The  applicant was holding a lock knife. The deceased walked away, further into the  alleyway, but was followed by the applicant and others. When the applicant and  deceased came face to face again, they appeared to a rgue and the applicant struck the  deceased rapidly once in the chest with his knife. As the deceased moved away, the  applicant appeared to be being held back by a larger boy, and when he again tried to  approach the deceased with the knife in his hand, he w as blocked and trapped in the  corner by another youth.   15. The deceased staggered out of the alleyway and collapsed. The applicant immediately  left the scene on the “Boris Bike”. Whilst waiting for the emergency services, some of  the boys went through the deceased’s pockets in what may have been an attempt to  remo ve incriminating items such as the knife he had earlier. Elijah Oweyo was seen to  pick up a folding lock knife and drop it into a drain from where it was later recovered  by police . Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      16. The applicant went to his sister’s address where he was subsequently arrest ed. In  interview, he accepted that it was him in the CCTV footage but answered no further  questions.   17. It is shocking to record that two of the other young people in the alleyway at the time  of the murder, have been killed since Mr Hassan’s death; and crimin al proceedings in  respect of their deaths are currently pending. This is the context to one of the issues  which the media has raised in these proceedings, namely the public interest in the full  reporting of knife crime in relation to gang related activity which is a matter of serious  concern in London.   18. At his trial, the applicant gave evidence over the course of three days.  He said that all  of the boys were part of a broad ‘group’ with two primary friendship groups which  overlapped. There was a background o f drug dealing. The applicant said he had  previously sold cannabis on behalf of the deceased, who was a member of the W12 /  12Anti /12 World Gang. He said he had acted in self -defence. Loss of control and lack  of intent were also left to the jury. The appl icant said the deceased had accused him of  owing £50 and had previously stabbed him in the arm.  He claimed that the deceased  told him to make up the £50 loss by selling class ‘A’ drugs on a “county lines” basis  and threatened to stab him again if he did n ot agree to do so. The applicant also said  that the day before the murder, a group of people (including the applicant and the  deceased) were in a so -called “cuckoo house” where the deceased made threats to him  with a large “Zombie” knife (said to be the on e recovered from the alleyway cupboard).  It was an agreed fact that the deceased and Idris Mohammed were linked to two “ cuckoo  houses”.   19. The applicant said that on the day of the incident he was told that the deceased wanted  to see him and that something wa s planned towards him (described by the applicant as  “moving dodgy” against him). He said that at the location, he picked up the knife from  the bush because this was known to be the place where the deceased kept weapons. He  described the argument that unfo lded and said that he stabbed the deceased in self - defence because the deceased had reached towards his waistband, where he believed  the deceased had a hidden knife.   20. On 6 September 2019, the jury convicted the applicant of murder. In view of what could  be seen on the CCTV footage, this was not a surprising conclusion. Sentencing was  adjourned pending the provision of reports.   21. In her sentencing remarks the judge said that she had no doubt that the applicant had  deliberately armed himself with a knife and was  ready to use it if he decided to do so.  She said the CCTV footage clearly showed that the applicant had the knife in his hand  when he entered the alleyway, that the deceased did not have a knife or weapon of any  kind in his hand, that the applicant was th e aggressor, that at one stage the deceased  walked away but the applicant had followed and stabbed him in the chest with at least  moderate force. She also noted that such was his anger that it took two of his friends to  restrain him and prevent him from at tacking the deceased again. She observed that the  applicant had made no comment in interview and in evidence during the trial had sought  to portray the deceased as the aggressor. The judge said that she was not satisfied to the  criminal standard however th at the applicant had intended to kill the deceased. As to  the minimum term, the judge said that she had considered the seriousness of the offence, Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      the general principles of the Criminal Justice Act 2003, Schedule 21, and the  Sentencing Council’s definitive  guideline on sentencing children and young people.   22. In assessing culpability, the following aggravating factors were identified: the applicant  arrived at a planned meeting with the deceased, armed with a knife; the stabbing took  place in an alleyway off a residential street; the fact that the applicant fled from the  scene; that members of the public were left to deal with the situation, upon whom it  was likely to have a profound effect; the fact that the applicant had a history of  offending; and the applica nt’s lack of remorse as indicated by the fact that he fled the  scene, disposed of the murder weapon, and went to stay with his sister (the judge did  not accept the view of the applicant’s social worker that the applicant had indeed shown  remorse). The judg e observed that the applicant had advanced three defences at trial,  all of which were rejected by the jury. She did not accept the submission of Mr  Bromley -Martin QC that sentence should be passed on the basis that there was an  element of provocation and a n element of self -defence. Nor did the judge accept that  the applicant had been previously stabbed in the arm by the deceased. She noted his  account to his father had been that he was stabbed by an unknown assailant during a  robbery. The mitigating feature s were identified as the applicant’s youth and lack of  maturity, and the matters set out in the detailed report of the applicant’s social worker.     Leave to appeal against sentence   23. The application for leave to appeal against sentence was referred to the Ful l Court by  the Registrar to be heard at the same time as the issues raised in relation to the Excepting  Direction.   24. On behalf of the applicant, Mr Bromley -Martin QC submitted that the 15 -year  minimum term was manifestly excessive. He relied in particular on three matters. First,  the judge erred in finding a lack of remorse and taking that into account as an  aggravating factor. Second, the judge erred in finding that the deceased had not stabbed  the applicant on an earlier occasion. Third, the judge referred to the deceased in positive  terms in her sentencing remarks when he was in fact an older gang leader with a history   of violence and knife possession. We see no arguable merit in any of these points.   25. In relation to remorse, the judge had heard the applicant give oral evidence over three  days and was best placed to assess the true position. Similarly, the judge was enti tled  to find, having heard evidence, that the applicant had not been stabbed on an earlier  occasion by the deceased. His claim in this respect was supported only by his evidence,  which the judge was entitled to reject. Finally, the judge’s sentencing remar ks do not  demonstrate that she impermissibly took into account the deceased’s claimed positive  character in arriving at the minimum term.  The judge merely recorded, as she was quite  entitled to do, the personal statements made by the deceased’s mother and  sister as to  what the deceased had meant to them as well as what could not sensibly be disputed,  namely that “Ayub was a much -loved teenager who had his whole life ahead of him.   You took that away from him”.   26. Apart from these specific matters, there is no  arguable basis for contending that the  minimum term was manifestly excessive having regard to the aggravating features Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      correctly identified by the judge, including in particular, that the applicant had brought  a knife to the scene. This is a factor that m ay in an appropriate case justify significant  upward movement from the starting point of 12 years when sentencing those under 18  at the date of the commission of such an offence: s ee R v Odegbune  [2013] EWCA 711,  at para 30, and R v Huggins  [2016] EWCA Cri m 1715 at para 44.   27. The application for leave to appeal against sentence is accordingly refused.   Reporting restrictions: the statutory framework   28. Section 45 of the 1999 Act provides as follows:   “45.— Power to restrict reporting of criminal proceedings  involving persons under 18.   (1)  This section applies (subject to subsection (2)) in relation  to—  (a)  any criminal proceedings in any court (other than a  service court) in England and Wales or Northern Ireland; and   (b)  any proceedings (whethe r in the United Kingdom or  elsewhere) in any service court.   (2)  This section does not apply in relation to any proceedings to  which  section 49  of the  Children and Young Persons Act 1933   applies.   (3)  The court may direct that no matter relating to any person  concerned in the proceedings shall while he is under the age of  18 be included in any publication if it is likely to lead members  of the public to  identify him as a person concerned in the  proceedings.   (4)  The court or an appellate court may by direction (“an  excepting direction”) dispense, to any extent specified in the  excepting direction, with the restrictions imposed by a direction  under subsec tion (3) if it is satisfied that it is necessary in the  interests of justice to do so.   (5)  The court or an appellate court may also by direction (“an  excepting direction”) dispense, to any extent specified in the  excepting direction, with the restrictions  imposed by a direction  under subsection (3) if it is satisfied —  (a)  that their effect is to impose a substantial and  unreasonable restriction on the reporting of the proceedings,  and Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      (b)  that it is in the public interest to remove or relax that  restrict ion;  but no excepting direction shall be given under this subsection  by reason only of the fact that the proceedings have been  determined in any way or have been abandoned.   (6)  When deciding whether to make —  (a)  a direction under subsection (3) in relati on to a person, or   (b)  an excepting direction under subsection (4) or (5) by  virtue of which the restrictions imposed by a direction under  subsection (3) would be dispensed with (to any extent) in  relation to a person,   the court or (as the case may be) th e appellate court shall have  regard to the welfare of that person.   (7)  For the purposes of subsection (3) any reference to a person  concerned in the proceedings is to a person —  (a)  against or in respect of whom the proceedings are taken,  or  (b)  who is a witness in the proceedings.   (8)  The matters relating to a person in relation to which the  restrictions imposed by a direction under subsection (3) apply (if  their inclusion in any publication is likely to have the result  mentioned in that su bsection) include in particular —  (a)  his name,   (b)  his address,   (c)  the identity of any school or other educational  establishment attended by him,   (d)  the identity of any place of work, and   (e)  any still or moving picture of him.   (9)  A direction unde r subsection (3) may be revoked by the  court or an appellate court.   (10)  An excepting direction —  (a)  may be given at the time the direction under subsection  (3) is given or subsequently; and  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      (b)  may be varied or revoked by the court or an appellate  court.  (11)  In this section  “appellate court”, in relation to any  proceedings in a court, means a court dealing with an appeal  (including an appeal by way of case stated) arising out of the  proceedings or with any further appeal. ”    29. The definition of “court” f or the purposes of this provision is found in section 63 of the  1999 Act which says: ““court” …means a magistrates’ court, the Crown Court or the  criminal division of the Court of Appeal”.   30. Section 45 came into force on 13 April 2015. Prior to that, the re levant power to restrict  reporting in relation to children and young persons was found in section 39 of the  Children and Young Persons Act 1933 (the 1933 Act), which provided:     “39 Power to prohibit publication of certain matter in  newspapers.   (1)  In relation to any proceedings in any court, the court may  direct that —  (a)  no newspaper report of the proceedings shall reveal the  name, address or school, or include any particulars calculated  to lead to the identification, of any child or young pe rson  concerned in the proceedings, either as being the person  by or  against  or in respect of whom the proceedings are taken, or as  being a witness therein:   (b)  no picture shall be published in any newspaper as being  or including a picture of any child or young person so  concerned in the proceedings as aforesaid;    except in so far (if at all) as may be permitted by the direction  of the court.   (2)  Any person who publishes any matter in contravention of  any such direction shall on summary conviction be liabl e in  respect of each offence to a fine not exceeding  level 5 on the  standard scale.”     31. Section 159 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (the CJA 1988) provides, so far as is  relevant:    Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      “159. — Crown Court proceedings — orders restricting or  preventing reports or restricting public access.   (1) A person aggrieved may appeal to the Court of Appeal, if that  court grants leave, against —  (a) an order under section 4 or 11 of the Contempt of Cou rt  Act 1981 made in relation to a trial on indictment;   (aa)  an order made by the Crown Court under  section 58(7)  or (8)  of the  Criminal Procedure an d Investigations Act  1996  in a case where the Court has convicted a person on a  trial on indictment;.   (b)  any order restricting the access of the public to the whole  or any part of a trial on indictment or to any proceedings  ancillary to such a trial; and   (c)  any order restricting the publication of any report of the  whole or any part of a trial on indictment or any such ancillary  proceedings;   and the decision of the Court of Appeal shall be final.   …  (5) On the hearing of an appeal under this section the  Court of  Appeal shall have power —   (a) to stay any proceedings in any other court until after the  appeal is disposed of;   (b) to confirm, reverse or vary the order complained of; and   (c) to make such order as to costs as it thinks fit…”     Judicial Review o f the Crown Court   32. In R v. Aziz  [2019] EWCA Crim 1568 at para 52, Lord Burnett CJ observed, without  argument, that there is a body of authority which makes it plain that orders concerning  the issue of whether a child convicted of a criminal offence may be n amed are  susceptible to judicial review, at the very least after conviction. It is common ground  that these observations were obiter .   33. Lord Burnett CJ went on to note at para 57 that “it may become necessary to revisit  whether decisions in this area are properly subject to judicial review”. That is the  exercise which we need to undertake in the present case. But we emphasise at the outset  that the specific question before us is wh ether a Crown Court Judge’s decision to make  an excepting direction under section 45(5) of the 1999 Act after a defendant’s  conviction, is susceptible to judicial review.  Both the applicant and the Crown are Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      agreed that such a decision is subject to judic ial review. However, no court in England  and Wales has decided the point, though there is substantial authority, considered in  more detail below, which has addressed the related issue of the availability of judicial  review to challenges to orders made by t he Crown Court under section 39 of the 1933  Act.  34. The starting point is Section 29(3) of the Senior Courts Act 1981 (the 1981 Act), which  provides as follows:   “(3)   In relation to the jurisdiction of the Crown Court,  other  than its jurisdiction in matters relating to trial on indictment , the  High Court shall have all such jurisdiction to make  mandatory,  prohibiting or quashing orders  as the High Court possesses in  relation to the jurisdiction of an inferior court.”   (Emphasis added)     35. Accordingly, judicial re view is not available to challenge a decision of a judge sitting  in the Crown Court, if that decision is “relating to a trial on indictment”. The  interpretation of this wording in Section 29(3) has proved problematic, as is clear from  Rose LJ’s observation  in R v Crown Court at Manchester, ex parte H  [2000] 1 WLR,  760 at p766C, where he said that this section has “…attracted perhaps more judicial  consideration, in not always apparently reconcilable decisions, than any other statutory  provision”.   36. In Re Smalley [1985] A.C. 622, at  p640H to 641, Lord Bridge explained that as a matter  of history the Crown Court inherited the functions of the courts of quarter sessions and  assize court. The former had always been subject to the supervisory jurisdiction o f the  High Court, exercised by the prerogative writs, while the assize courts, as superior  courts of record, were not. Against that background, he observed that there was nothing  wrong in principle with the Crown Court being subject to judicial review. Lor d Bridge  considered that in interpreting section 29(3) of the 1981 Act (and in deciding what was  excluded from such review) a “helpful pointer”  would be to ask whether the decision  of the Crown Court was one affecting the conduct of a trial on indictment g iven in the  course of the trial or by way of pre -trial directions: see p 642F, p643E -H and p644A.   37. In Re Sampson [1987] 1 W.L.R. 194, Lord Bridge returned to this question and  emphasised again that the question whether the decision had affected the conduct of the  trial was a “pointer” and not a test. So, in that case the House of Lords held that a costs  order was an order relating to trial on indictment, as it was “an integral part of the trial  process”: see p197F.   38. In R v. Manchester Crown Court, ex p. DPP [1993] 1 W.L.R 1524, Lord Browne - Wilkinson suggested a further “helpful pointer” was the answer to this question:  is the  decision sought to be reviewed one arising in the issue between the Crown and the  defendant formulated by the indictment (including the costs of such issue)? If the  answer is ‘yes’ then to permit the decision to be challenged by judicial review may  lead  to delay in the trial and the matter is therefore probably excluded from review by the  section. If the answer is ‘no’, the decision of the Crown Court is truly collateral to the Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      indictment and judicial review of that decision will not delay the trial , therefore it may  well not be excluded by the section” : see p467.  39. In R v. Central Criminal Court ex  parte Crook and another (The Times 8 November  1984) a Divisional Court considered a challenge to an order made under section 11 of  the Contempt of Court Ac t 1981. The order prevented the reporting of the identity of a  witness who was the victim of offending alleged to amount to kidnap, false  imprisonment, robbery, and sexual offending. The order was made before the jury was  empanelled and was revisited durin g the course of the witness’s evidence. Stephen  Brown LJ, giving the judgment of the Court, found that judicial review was not  available. He said:      “I am satisfied that the Judge's order in this case was made in  relation to a trial on indictment; the trial had commenced  although the jury had not yet been empanelled. He made his  order intending it to influence the conduct of the trial by ensuring  that the witness in question, who was the principal witness for  the Crown, should be protect ed by an order designed to  safeguard her anonymity outside the court. Accordingly, I feel  bound to hold that this court has no jurisdiction to entertain this  application for judicial review.”     40. Stephen Brown LJ said that he had come to this conclusion with “considerable  reluctance”. Watkins LJ, concurring, expressed “regret” that he was “driven” to the  same view.   41. In R v. Leicester Crown Court ex parte S (a minor)  [1993] 1 W.L.R 111, a minor sought  to challenge by way of judicial review a decision made after  his conviction by the  Crown Court, to discharge a section 39 order which prevented the reporting of matters  leading to his identification. The Divisional Court concluded that the power conferred  by section 39 was “neither an integral part of the trial pro cess nor does it affect the  course or conduct of the trial” and it was therefore subject to judicial review ( p113H).  Further, the power conferred by section 39 was “a power designed for use whenever  and wherever in some kind of judicial proceeding a curb n eeds to be imposed publicly  in the interests of a child or young person and the broader public interest”.   42. In R v. Lee [1993] 1 W.L.R 103, the Court of Appeal considered an appeal by a  convicted juvenile against a decision to lift a reporting restriction o rder made under  section 39 of the 1933 Act. In summary, it decided that:   (1) Whilst section 39 permitted “any court” to make an order in relation to “any  proceedings”, a proper construction of the section was that the “proceedings”  were the proceedings in the court making the order and, therefore, the Court of  Appeal was not able to make an order in relation to proceedings in the Crown  Court (p108E ).  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      (2) Whilst a member of the press aggrieved at a restriction on reporting might  appeal to the Court of Appeal pursua nt to section 159 of the CJA 1988, a  defendant aggrieved at the withholding or discharge of such an order should  challenge it by way judicial review (p110H ).   In that case, the jurisdiction to seek a remedy by way of judicial review was assumed  without arg ument.   43. Following the decision in Lee the position was therefore tolerably clear. Orders made  under section 39 of the 1933 Act were open to challenge in the Court of Appeal pursuant  to section 159. However, a refusal to make such an order, or an order disch arging an  order made under section 39 of the 1933 Act was only amenable to challenge by way  of judicial review.   44. In R v Harrow Crown Court, ex parte Perkins and R v. Cardiff Crown Court, ex parte  M (a minor)  (1998) 162 JP 162 the judge refused to make a se ction 39 order after  sentence. The Divisional Court found his decision was amenable to challenge by way  of judicial review as the decision did not “relate to a trial on indictment”. The analysis  of Sullivan J (with whom Rose LJ agreed) is of some importanc e to the issues before  us. It was as follows:   (1) The words (“relate to a trial on indictment”) should not be given an extended  meaning: p541G.   (2) An order made after the conclusion of the trial “will have no possible effect  upon the conduct of that trial” and is  “not an integral part of the trial process”:  p542A.   (3) The power being exercised was a “separate child protection power, which is  distinct from [the] proceedings”, and was “fairly described as collateral to those  proceedings”: p542G.   (4) The decision was not one  which arose in the issue between the Crown and the  defendant formulated by the indictment: p542C -D.    45. Thus far, save for Crook, the approach was all “one way”. In R v Winchester Crown  Court ex parte B (a minor)  [1999] 1 W.L.R 788 however a divergent approach was  taken. In that case, a convicted minor attempted to challenge by way of judicial review  a decision made by the Crown Court to discharge a reporting restriction order made  pursuant to section 39. In the D ivisional Court, Simon Brown LJ giving the judgment  of the Court held:   (1) That previous consideration of the issue had overlooked the ruling in Crook,  in  which the Divisional Court had found that an order preventing the reporting of  the identity of a witness  pursuant to section 11 of the Contempt of Court Act  1981 was “relating to a trial on indictment” and “not amenable to judicial  review” (see p791G -H). He explained that the decision in Crook had led to the  enactment of section 159 of the CJA 1988.  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      (2) After th e enactment of section 159, a person aggrieved by an order restricting  reporting could appeal to the Court of Appeal, but there was no equivalent  provision allowing for an appeal by a person aggrieved by the failure to make  such an order, or the discharge of such an order (p792E).   (3) That the remedy of judicial review had been found to be appropriate, or assumed  to be so without argument, in a number of previous cases concerning the  discharge of section 39 orders (p794G to 795A).   (4) However, adopting the reason ing in Crook , a discharge of a section 39 order  would amount to a matter relating to trial on indictment and judicial review was  not available.     46. The divergent approach between the decision in Winchester  and the cases which  followed Lee was considered in Ex parte H (a minor) . Rose LJ (with whom Forbes J  agreed) said that the courts had “done their best” to resolve the issue of jurisdiction to  review reporting orders, and it was “time now for Parliament to  introduce, as a matter  of urgency, clarifying legislation which addresses the problems arising not only from  section 29(3) of the Supreme Court Act 1981 itself, but also from its relationship with  other legislation, in particular, section 39 of the Act of  1933 and the provisions of  section 159 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988…” (p765H to 766A).   47. Rose LJ concluded that, whilst some orders made at the outset of proceedings to protect  witnesses would “relate to a trial on indictment”, a decision to lift repor ting restrictions  after conviction and sentence would not fall within that prohibition (p767E), and would  be amenable to judicial review. To this extent the Winchester case was not followed.  Rose LJ also endorsed the approach taken by the Divisional Court in Cardiff Crown  Court ex parte M  (see 768D).  Forbes J said further, that permitting a challenge by way  of judicial review was also consistent with the protections afforded by the European  Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Free doms (“the  Convention”).  He added that were the decision to discharge the reporting restrictions  not to be susceptible to challenge by way of judicial review, a juvenile offender would  be left with no route of appeal against an order permitting the press to report his name.  Such a position would, at least arguably, conflict with the offender’s article 6  Convention rights ( p770-1).   48. In R(Y) v Aylesbury Youth Court [2012] EWHC 1140 (Admin) the Divisional Court  assumed (without contrary argument) that the dec ision of the Crown Court to vary an  order made under section 39 of the 1933 Act (thereby permitting the identification of  the claimant, a minor) was susceptible to judicial review; and the order made by the  Crown Court was quashed on the grounds that insuf ficient reasons had been given for  making it. At para 21, Hooper LJ said that although there had been doubts expressed in  the past, it seemed clear that the High Court had jurisdiction to entertain an application  for judicial review of the judge’s order.   49. A similar view was expressed by Sir Brian Leveson P in R (JC and another) v. Central  Criminal Court [2014] 1 W.L.R 3697. In that case, the Crown Court had decided that  a section 39 order made in relation to youths convicted of terrorist offences would  autom atically expire for each of them, on their 18th birthday. This decision was Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      challenged by way of judicial review. Sir Brian Leveson P summarised the position that  the courts had reached on the issue of the jurisdiction in this way:   “40. By way of addendum to this judgment, it is worth adding  one further point. Although not argued before us, there has been  some doubt whether, in England and Wales, it is open to these  claimants to commence proceedings for judicial review in  relation to this order: see  Archbol d's Criminal Pleading,  Evidence and Practice , 2014 ed, para 7 -13. That is a reflection  of R v Winchester Crown Court, Ex p B (A Minor) [1999] 1  WLR 788. Simon Brown LJ held that, while those aggrieved by  an order restricting publication had a remedy by way  of appeal  to the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) under section 159 of  the Criminal Justice Act 1988 , those aggrieved by a failure to  restrain publication had no such remedy, and must apply to the  trial judge to reconsider that decision: that was a co nsequence of  the operation of section 29(3) of the Senior Courts Act 1981 that  the High Court had no jurisdiction “in matters relating to trial on  indictment”.    41. This court has, in fact, tended to consider that section 39  orders (and orders discharging such orders) are amenable to  judicial review by the child affected (see  R v Leicester Crown  Court, Ex p S (A Minor) (Note) [1993] 1 WLR 111  ; R v Inner  London Crown Court, Ex p Barnes The Times, 7 August 1995  ; R v Central Criminal Court, Ex p S [1999] 1 FLR 480  ; R v  Harrow Crown Court, Ex p Perkins (1998) 162 JP 527  ; R v  Manchester Crown Court, Ex p H (A Minor) [2000] 1 WLR  760 ; Ex p W [2001] Cr App R 2 ;  R (T) v St Albans Crown  Court [2002] EWHC 1129 (Admin); and R (Y) v Aylesbury  Crown Court  [2012] EMLR 642 in which Hooper LJ  acknowledged at para 21 that there had been doubts but that it  now “seems clear” that there was jurisdiction. That view is  entirely consistent with the decision of the  Court of Appeal in R  v Lee [1993] 1 WLR 103).    42. I n Northern Ireland, on the other hand, where the Crown  Court cannot be judicially reviewed (by virtue of section 1 of the  Judicature (Northern Ireland) Act 1978), the Northern Ireland  Court of Appeal has relied on section 3 of the Human Rights Act  1998 to read into section 159(1)(c) of the 1988 Act a right of  appeal for the child aggrieved by the withholding or discharge  of a section 39 order: see  R v McGreechan [2014] NICA 5  at  [24]. Thus, section 159 has a different meaning in different  jurisdictions, whi ch cannot be sensible. This also points to the  requirement of urgent legislative intervention.”     50. Turning to the 1999 Act, in R v. Markham  [2017] EWCA Crim 739; [2017] 2 Cr. App.  R. (S.) 30, the Court of Appeal allowed an appeal against sentence and, in the  same Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      proceedings, considered the propriety of an excepting direction made pursuant to  section 45 of the 1999 Act. The excepting direction had been challenged by way of  judicial review, and permission had been granted to apply for judicial review in those  proceedings. However, the appeal against sentence was considered to “carr[y] with it  the need for [the Court of Appeal] to make its own assessment of the position”, and this  therefore “superseded the full hearing with the result that the proceedings in the   Administrative Court become academic” : para 2.  As was later said in Aziz: “The report  of Markham  does not spell this out, but we infer that the Appellants in that case were  invoking the power conferred by s.45 (10)…”.   51. In Markham  the Court of Appeal rev iewed the decision of the trial judge and exercised  their “own discretion independently”  when reviewing the excepting direction :see para  88. It is important to note however that at the time the court in Markham undertook this  exercise they were seised of a  substantive appeal against sentence, leave to appeal  having been granted earlier by the single judge : see para 4. So, the court was there  clearly “dealing with an appeal” within section 45(11) of the 1999 Act. This point is  relevant to our analysis of the  Court of Appeal’s jurisdiction, considered below.   52. As Sir Brian Leveson said in R (JC and another) the courts in this jurisdiction have  tended to consider that section 39 orders made by the Crown Court were amenable to  judicial review by the child affected .  The parties are agreed that by parity of reasoning,  this power of review should be available in respect of excepting directions made under  the 1999 Act. We agree. If there remains any doubt about it, in our judgment, the  reasoning in Winchester (and Crook) should no longer to be followed.   53. We would reach the same conclusion as a matter of principle. Confining ourselves to  the specific question we have identified at para 33 above, in our judgment for the  purposes of section 29(3) of the 1981 Act the making of an excepting direction after  conv ictgion in this case was not a matter relating to trial on indictment and is therefore  amenable to judicial review. This is for the following reasons:   (1) First, the decision being reviewed was plainly not one arising in the issue  between the Crown and the def endant formulated in the indictment (using Lord  Browne -Wilkinson’s “helpful pointer”: see para 38 above). The Excepting  Direction was made after the verdict had been returned and at the sentencing  hearing. It could have been made immediately after sentenci ng was concluded.   (2) Second, the applicant’s challenge is to the variation of an earlier order, which  had provided protection to a child’s rights, incidental and collateral  to the trial  process. In this connection, we would adopt the reasoning of the court i n R v  Harrow Crown Court, ex parte Perkins and R v. Cardiff Crown Court, ex parte  M (a minor) (see para 44 above). In our view, this reasoning applies with equal  force to section 45 challenges.   (3) Third, the fact that decisions in this category of cases can be subject to judicial  review does not undermine the rationale prohibiting such challenges, namely:  (i) the need to discourage the sort of satellite litigation which is capable of  disrupting criminal trials (see Smalley  at p642E -H): the decision here i s made  after the trial process is complete; and (ii) the fact that the defendant in criminal  proceedings has available an adequate alternative remedy or route of appeal  against conviction or sentence under the Criminal Appeal Act 1968.  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      54. We conclude therefo re that the Excepting Direction made in respect of the applicant is  susceptible to Judicial review (a decision we have reached without needing to decide  whether such an outcome more generally is necessary to protect the Convention rights  of juvenile defend ants).     Does a defendant have a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division in respect  of excepting directions made under section 45 of the 1999 Act?   55. Before turning to this next question, it is helpful to identify the general jurisdiction of  this court.   56. The jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is governed by the 1981 Act under which it is  part of the Senior Courts of England and Wales: section 1(1) of the 1981 Act. The Court  of Appeal is a superior court of record: section 15(1) of the 1981 Ac t. The general  jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is “all such jurisdiction (whether civil or criminal)  as is conferred on it by or under [the 1981 Act] or by any other Act”, and “all such other  jurisdiction (whether civil or criminal) as was exercisable by it immediately before the  commencement of the [1981] Act”: section 15(1)(a) of the 1981 Act. The jurisdiction  of the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division is, accordingly, entirely statutory: R v  Jefferies (1968) 52 Cr. App. R 654. See also the helpful exp osition in The Court of  Appeal Criminal Division (A Practitioner’s Guide)  (2nd Edition) at para  3-001.   57. No jurisdiction to review an excepting direction is conferred on the Court of Appeal,  Criminal Division by the Criminal Appeal Act 1968 (the main jurisd ictional statute) as  an excepting direction is not an order made by the court when dealing with the offender  in respect of the offence: Aziz at para 54 and R v McGreechan   [2014] NICA 5 : paras  16 to 19. Section 159 of the CJA 1988, permits only a party agg rieved by an order  “restricting”  publication, and not to a party aggrieved by an order discharging or  revoking reporting restrictions, to appeal to the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division:  Aziz, para 55. So, a person in the position of the applicant in this  case could not use  section 159 of the CJA 1988 to bring his challenge before the Court of Appeal, Criminal  Division.   58. As we have found, in the circumstances of this case, the Divisional Court has  supervisory jurisdiction in relation to the making of an exc epting direction. This means  there is no lacuna in the protection of the rights of children (and indeed other vulnerable  persons) who might be aggrieved at the making of excepting directions in the Crown  Court. This also means that the problem which arose in Northern Ireland  and which  was addressed in McGreechan at para 15 namely that the High Court cannot review  decisions of the Crown Court, does not arise in this jurisdiction.   59. Against this background, our conclusions on the question posed above are as fo llows:   (1) As a matter of natural and ordinary meaning, section 45 of the 1999 Act does  not provide a defendant with the right to appeal to the Court of Appeal, Criminal  Division against the making of an excepting direction. This is because there is  no languag e such as that found in section 1(1) of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968  (“…a person convicted of an offence on indictment may appeal to the Court of Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      Appeal against his conviction), or in  section 159 of the CJA 1988 (“A person  aggrieved may appeal to the Court of Appeal…”).    (2) The Court of Appeal, Criminal Division enjoys no appellate jurisdiction beyond  that specifically conferred on it by statute. The wording of the 1999 Act  therefore fir mly resolves the question of the lack of appellate jurisdiction. It is  additionally to be noted that the 1999 Act contains no statutory mechanism for  the operation of such an appellate jurisdiction (with regard to matters such as  leave, and whether it woul d be required,  the grounds for an appeal and whether  it would be a review or de novo, the time limits for any appeal and so on).   (3) Though no appellate jurisdiction is conferred by the 1999 Act, Parliament  clearly intended that in some  situations the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division  would have the power to “dispense” with a restriction imposed by the Crown  Court under section 45(3), to make an excepting direction itself and to “vary or  revoke” excepting directions made by the Crown: see sections 45(4), 45( 6) and  45(10) of the 1999 Act.   (4) These provisions do not however confer a discrete right of appeal, but are rather  powers which  fall to be exercised in the limited situation defined in the  legislation, that is when the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division is  “…dealing  with an appeal…arising out of the proceedings or with any further appeal”: see  section 45(11) of the 1999 Act.   (5) In our judgment, both the specific nature of these powers and the time at which  they may be exercised, point clearly to the conclusion  that Parliament’s  intention in enacting section 45 of the 1999 Act was to equip the Court of  Appeal, Criminal Division with the necessary power to make  ancillary orders  as regards reporting restrictions and excepting directions when dealing with a  substan tive appeal. No freestanding appellate jurisdiction has been conferred.   (6) The fact that section 45 confers powers on what is called an “appellate court”  does not mean that it creates an appellate jurisdiction. An appellate court could  reach a decision on an appeal, or make specific findings, or hear evidence   which  would make it appropriate to vary or revoke an excepting direction (if for  example, an appeal against conviction was allowed and a retrial ordered, or  where there was evidence as to the mental heal th of a convicted child) in  circumstances where there was no discrete appeal against the making of an  excepting direction itself.   (7) Further, the wording of section 45(11) refers only to an appeal . In contrast, the  Criminal Appeal Act 1968 differentiates bet ween an “appeal” and an  “application”. A “decision of the Court of Appeal on appeal” in section 33 of  that Act refers only to a decision following  the grant of leave: R v Garwood  [2017] EWCA Crim 59; [2017] 1 WLR 3182 at para 7.    60. We consider therefore tha t the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division does not enjoy a  concurrent jurisdiction with the Divisional Court to entertain freestanding appellate  challenges to excepting directions. It does however enjoy a limited power to consider  an excepting direction as an ancillary matter when “dealing with an appeal ” against  conviction and sentence.  However, this power is ancillary to an appeal: it does not exist Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      unless and until  leave to appeal has been granted and can never be invoked as the basis  for an appeal to th e Court of Appeal, Criminal Division.   61. In practical terms, we consider section 45 of the 1999 Act is intended to operate as  follows. If an applicant for permission to appeal against conviction or sentence  considers that the outcome of that appeal (once deci ded following leave) may require  the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division to revisit or vary reporting restrictions under  the 1999 Act, they can ask the court to use its ancillary powers under section 45 to do  so. But the applicant cannot base any aspect of his appeal to that court on a complaint  about an excepting direction. Equally, if leave to appeal has not been granted or has  been refused, these ancillary powers cannot be exercised. In neither of those situations  is the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division  “dealing with an appeal”. We accordingly do  not accept the submissions made on behalf of the Crown and the applicant that once an  application for leave is before the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division (and whether  leave has been granted and even if it is refused), this Court has jurisdiction to hear an  appeal against an excepting direction. The contrary position would be problematic. An  application for leave to appeal (against conviction or sentence) which is otherwise  hopeless, might then be made simply s o the applicant could get his “foot in the door”  and challenge the excepting direction. Further, such a challenge could then be pursued,  presumably as of right, without the need for leave (there being no statutory regime  prescribing such a condition) and r egardless of issues such as delay which are regulated  by the Criminal Appeal Act 1968.   62. We would add these further points. First, the availability of judicial review means it is  unnecessary to adopt a strained construction of the 1999 Act to enable a chall enge to  an excepting direction to be made. Second, having regard to the issues they encompass,  we consider challenges to excepting direction s are better dealt with by the Divisional  Court, where there are procedural and other safeguards to the rights for e xample of  interested parties (which would normally include the media). Third, the availability of  judicial review, means that that persons involved in a trial other than the defendant  (victims and witnesses for example who have no recourse to the Court of Appeal,  Criminal Division) have a route of challenge to excepting directions which may directly  affect them. See sections 45A(10) and 46(9) of the 1999 Act which concern excepting  directions which respectively remove lifetime anonymity afforded to witnesse s and  victims until they are 18, and enable the anonymisation of adult witnesses.      The challenge to the Excepting Direction in this case   63. By an Order dated 20 February 2020, Supperstone J directed that the judicial review  claim be heard on a “rolled -up” basis by the Divisional Court at the same time as the  applicant’s appeal to the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division. For the purposes of  considering the claim we sat as a Divisional Court.   64. In his Detailed Grounds, the applicant makes three core complaints about the making  of the Excepting Direction and the proceedings before the judge: (i) procedural  unfairness; (ii) failure to take into account relevant factors including the applicant’s  welfare, leading to an error in finding that it was in  the public interest to remove the  restrictions; and (iii) a failure by the judge to give sufficient reasons for making the  Excepting Direction.  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      65. We start by setting out in brief the legal principles which govern the making of such  directions and the princ iples applied by the Divisional Court in a public law review.   66. As to the legal principles, these were comprehensively considered in Markham  at para  73 to 90 and in Aziz at para 30 to 40 and are now well -established. They have been  developed taking full acco unt of Convention case law and other international law  obligations of the United Kingdom. The international dimension relating to the  protection of children is given significant weight in the domestic law balancing exercise  and there is no need to recite t he international law materials in every case where this  issue arise s: Markham  at para 80.  67. Drawing upon those two decisions, the relevant principles may be summarised as  follows:   (1) The general approach to be taken is that reports of proceedings in open court  should not be restricted unless there are reasons to do so which outweigh the  legitimate interests of the public in receiving fair and accurate reports of  criminal proceedings and in knowing the identity of those in the community  who have been guilty of cr iminal conduct.   (2) The fact that the person before the court is a child or young person will normally  be a good reason for restricting reports of the proceedings in the way permitted  by the legislation; and it will only be in rare cases that a direction unde r section  45(3) of the 1999 Act will not be given or, having been given, will be  discharged.   (3) The reason why removal of a restriction will be rare is the very great weight that  the court must give to the welfare of a child or young person. In practical ter ms,  this means that the power to dispense with anonymity must be exercised with  “very great care, caution and circumspection”. See the guidance given by Lord  Bingham CJ in the context of the 1933 Act in McKerry v. Teesdale and Wear  Valley Justice (2000) 16 4 JP 355; [2001] EMLR 5 at para 19.  (4) However, the welfare of the child or young person will not always trump other  considerations. Even in the Youth Court, where the regime requires that  proceedings should be held in private, with the public excluded, the c ourt has  power to lift restrictions. When a juvenile is tried on indictment in the Crown  Court there is a strong presumption that justice takes place in open court and the  press may report the proceedings.   (5) The decision for the trial judge is a case specifi c and discretionary assessment  where, guided by the above considerations, a balance falls to be struck between  the interests of the child and the wider public interest in open justice and  unrestricted reporting.   (6) When considering a challenge to an exceptin g direction made by the Crown  Court by way of judicial review, the Divisional Court will “respect the trial  judge’s assessment of the weight to be given to particular factors, interfering  only where an error of principle is identified, or the decision is p lainly wrong”:  see Markham  at para 36. Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      (7) To this standard public law approach must be added the conventional public law  requirements that: (i) a fair process should be adopted by the judge in  considering an application remove a restriction; and (ii) the judg e should give  reasons sufficient to explain why the balance has come down in favour of  removal of the restriction. This latter point is particularly important because the  judge’s reasons are the only indicator that the parties (and a reviewing court)  will have to satisfy themselves that the judge has indeed performed a lawful  balancing exercise.   68. We turn to the first ground, p rocedural fairness. The original anonymity order was made  before trial on 12 June 2019. The applicant was convicted on 6 September 2019 and  the sentencing hearing was adjourned to 27 September 2019, for the preparation of pre - sentence reports. The first in dication that the media wished to apply for an excepting  direction came from a communication to the judge in open court on the morning of 27  September 2019, at a time when so Mr Bromley -Martin QC told us, he was with his  client in the cells.   69. Once he was i n court, the application was made orally by a journalist, Mr Cameron  Charters of Central News. We were taken to the transcript of the hearing which included  the judge’s consideration of the application. The basis for his application was that the  press had been prevented in many cases from fully reporting and providing an analysis  of knife crime in London. Mr Charters submitted that this meant most knife murders  remained “secret and anonymous and those responsible often used masks and shadows  to hide their i dentity”; in essence, he argued that the public interest demanded full  reporting on a matter of pressing concern within the city. The fact that these crimes had  become so common was a matter which made it even more pressing that there be full  and unrestric ted reporting. At the hearing before the judge, the Crown remained neutral  on the issue, as they have before us.   70. Having heard Mr Charters, the judge indicated to the defence that she was aware of the  decision in Markham and the principles set out in that case, and she asked Mr Bromley - Martin QC if he had any submissions. The following exchanges then took place:     “MR BROMLEY -MARTIN:  You should also know we have  received information in particular from [KL’s] half sister, [name  redacted], that there had been threats made against her and her  family, and also towards [KL] himself. We would suggest that  the danger to members of [KL’s] family would be increased by  the publication of his name in the press, and that that is another  matter which I raise in the intere sts of justice as being a good  reason to retain the restriction. Would Your Honour allow me  just a moment? I make no complaint of course, but we’ve only  just had notice of this application. As I say, I make no complaint.   JUDGE DHIR:  It is not unusual.   MR BROMLEY -MARTIN:  No. Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      JUDGE DHIR:  I do not think anyone got notice, but they  are not unusual applications, are they?   MR BROMLEY -MARTIN:  As I say, there’s absolutely no  criticism whatsoever, and, as I say, I do have here (Ms Cecil has  very kindly provided it to me) a note in relation to the application  of section 45, and I would, if I may, like a short pause while I  consider whether or not it would assist Your Ladyship if we were  to upload it now.   JUDGE DHIR:  Right.   MR BROMLEY -MARTIN  Could I ask Your…   JUDGE DH IR: Mr Bromley -Martin, I really do want to  sentence your client today, but I am sitting for a limited period  of time this morning, and that is why I asked for the case to be  listed at 9.30. It would be a real shame if this case had to be put  back for any r eason. This application is one that you will be  familiar with. It is not uncommon at all. Certainly when it was  mentioned to me this morning for the first time it came as no  surprise. It is a matter for you. If you want me to look at it, I will,  but can yo u just be aware of the fact there is a limited amount of  time. I do not mind. It just means that we will not deal with the  sentence today: it will just need to be put off, that is all. I am  back in this court on 28 October.   MR MARTIN -BROMLEY: Can I suggest , please, that we put  this application back until after the sentence and deal with it  later?   JUDGE DHIR:  We are not going to deal with it later. The  application has been made today. They get dealt with at the  beginning. Otherwise, I am afraid people who are here just do  not know what the position is going to be…”     71. The note to which Mr Bromley -Martin QC referred dealt with the legal test. As can be  seen from the transcript it was provided to the judge via the DCS as she sat in court.  This note concerned th e guidance given by Haddon -Cave J in Pearce in a ruling given  at that trial on 7 December 2017. That ruling contained a detailed exposition of the  principles Haddon -Cave J had originally set out at first instance in Markham  (and which  were approved by the Court of Appeal in the appeal from this decision [2017] EWCA  Crim 739 as a “detailed and comprehensive analysis” of the law at para 75).  72. Following the exchanges referred to above, Mr Bromley -Martin QC then made brief  submissions as to the risks faced by th e applicant’s family (based on a witness statement  from the applicant’s mother) and referred to the pre -sentence reports as well as to the  risk of the applicant self -harming. The judge then made her ruling, in which she acceded  to the application made by M r Charters. She granted a stay pending the appeal/review Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      application which it was intimated to the judge would be made on behalf of the  applicant to the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division or the Divisional Court.   73. We recognise that the judge was faced with  a somewhat difficult procedural situation.  Moreover, one would expect counsel appearing in cases such as this one to be cognisant  of the possibility either that an application may be made for an excepting direction or  that the court may require submission s about it of its own motion, and to be prepared  for that eventuality. As the judge pointed out,  applications for an excepting direction  are not uncommon. Nonetheless m ore notice should have been given of the application;   and given its lateness,  and havin g regard to the “very great care, caution and  circumspection” which is required by a court when considering whether to remove the  anonymity of a child,  we are prepared to proceed on the basis that fairness required  that the defence should have been be giv en more time to deal with it, including, if there  was no other option, by the judge sentencing the applicant on that day and addressing  the substance of the application at a later date. Albeit any report about the murder and  its surrounding events would ha ve been of less immediate interest, the cause would  have been the very late notice of the application, made on the day of sentencing itself,  and some weeks after the applicant’s conviction.   74. In this connection, it is to be noted that the application in thi s case did not comply with  the requirements of the Criminal Procedure Rules at Part 6 which sets out a detailed  code for the imposition and removal of restrictions including those under section 45 of  the 1999 Act, including that:     “6.5. —(1) This rule applies where the court can vary or remove  a reporting or access restriction. (2) Unless other legislation  otherwise provides, the court may do so — (a) on application by  a party or person directly affected; or (b) on its own initiative.  (3) A party or pers on who wants the court to do so must — (a)  apply as soon as reasonably practicable; (b) notify — (i) each  other party, and (ii) such other person (if any) as the court  directs; (c) specify the restriction; (d) explain, as appropriate,  why it should be varied  or removed”.     75. Though the purport of this rule is clear, for the future, we consider that in cases of this  nature, it would be helpful for a judge to indicate in open court after a conviction, the  court’s  intention (if it be such) to consider the section 45 restrictions at the sentencing  hearing; and further, that any specific applications with regard to the relevant  restrictions must be made and notified to the parties as soon as reasonably practicable  in accordance with the process identified in the Crim inal Procedure Rules.        Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      Failure to give sufficient weight to the Applicant’s welfare and the public interest   76. The second and third grounds are a challenge to the merits of the judge’s decision and  the weight she gave to the material factors. In considering  this ground, the guidance in  Markham  requires us to respect the trial judge’s assessment of the weight to be given  to particular factors, interfering only where an error of principle is identified or the  decision is plainly wrong.   77. Additional evidence tha t was not before the judge and going to these factors has been  put before us. That additional evidence is material which Mr Bromley -Martin QC  submitted would have been relied upon if proper notice had been given of the  application to remove the applicant’s  anonymity and would have “demanded” a refusal  of the application. While judicial review challenges must be based upon evidence which  was before the original decision -maker (and not new material) when there is a valid  procedural complaint about an inabilit y to submit evidence below, judicial review  principles permit a reviewing court to consider the material which (but for the  procedural breach) would have been placed before the decision -maker. Having regard  to the view we have taken of procedural fairness,  we therefore take this further evidence  into account in considering these grounds of challenge.   78. The additional evidence may be summarised as follows. Threats had been made to the  applicant’s family, in particular to his siblings and their children. This had resulted in  the Local Authority taking steps to protect them by moving them to a different  residence. Mr Bromley -Martin QC relied upon a written statement from the Local  Authority obtained after the sentencing of the applicant. The statement includes t he  following:     “The Local Authority are deeply worried about reprisals towards  [KL’s sister] and her children, as well as her siblings and her  mother. This is particularly after being present during Court  Proceedings, and being seen to be associated with [ KL].  Following the conclusion of Proceedings in September 2019, the  Local Authority was so concerned about the welfare of [KL’s  sister] and her children that an emergency move was arranged.  [KL’s sister] and her children stayed in emergency  accommodation u ntil suitable temporary accommodation was  located in what was considered a safe area. This move was  finalised on 17 September 2019. The family are now living out  of Borough. Other measures, such as taxis, were arranged to  ensure that [KL’s sister] did not travel alone on public  transport.…It is my firm belief and worry that releasing any  information on the trial or about [her] brother would seriously  jeopardise any safety planning we have put in place for the  family. We have seen reprisals for family member s and one of  [the sister’s] brothers has now been attacked twice. [She] suffers  from severe anxiety and this would impair her ability to care for  the children, if she becomes pre -occupied about their immediate  safety. The children are under five and they w ould be subjected Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      to comments and possible ridicule and pre -judgment about their  Uncle by those who do not understand the context and  circumstances…”.     79. Reliance was also placed on a statement from the Youth Offending Team (YOT)  obtained after the sentencing hearing. The YOT witness said that the team had ‘grave  concerns’ if the applicant were to be identified in the press. She said that the murder  had had a significant impact on the local community, with a number of families having  to be relocated out of the Borough due to safety concerns. She said that it is anticipated  that these issues may create more conflict in the community and she also raised welfare  concerns with regards to the applicant and his vulnerabilities and prospects of  rehabilitatio n. The witness does not elaborate upon this point, however by explaining  for example, how it is said the applicant’s rehabilitation will be impeded if he remains  anonymous for another 18 months and in circumstances where he is to remain in  custody for the next 15 years.   80. As it is, on the material before her the judge ruled as follows:   “1. On 6 September 2019 the jury convicted the defendant  (referred to in this judgement as A) of the murder of Ayub  Hassan. He was 15 at the time of the murder and is now 16.  This  morning, on the day of sentence, the press have made an oral  application to publish the name of A.   2. On 12 June 2019 an order was made under subsection 45(3)  of the Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999 (“the  Order”).  It provides that no mat ter relating to A shall while he  is under the age of 18 be included in any publication if it is likely  to lead members of the public to identify him as a person  concerned in these proceedings.   3. I have power to make an excepting direction, dispensing wit h  any of the restrictions imposed by the Order: a. under subsection  45(4), if I am satisfied that it is necessary in the interests of  justice to do so; or b under subsection 45(5), if I am satisfied:   i. that the effect of the restriction is to impose a sub stantial  and unreasonable restriction on the reporting of the  proceedings, and   ii. that it is in the public interest to remove or relax the  restriction.   4. In either case, I am obliged to have regard to A’s welfare.  The  mere fact that the proceedings have  now been determined and  that A has been convicted is not in itself a reason for making an  excepting direction.   Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      5. I also have power under subsection 45(9) to revoke the Order  entirely, which is equivalent to making an excepting direction  which dispenses  with all of the restrictions imposed by the  Order.   6. That is what the Evening Standard Newspaper and Central  News say I should do.  Counsel for A, Mr Bromley Martin QC,  opposes their application.  They have not referred me to the law  but they do say that , at the very least, the requirements of section  45 (5) are satisfied.   7. I have been referred by the defence to a decision of the High  Court, R v Pearce (unreported 7th December 2017), in which  Haddon Cave J (as he then was) presided over. They say.   a. There is ‘good reason’ to maintain the direction  restricting reporting of A’s identity under Article 2 and  8.  b. The additional element of identifying A by name adds  little to the reporting in this particular case.   8. I have also considered the decision o f the Court of Appeal of  R v Markham [2017] 2 Cr.App.R. (S.) 30. which gives guidance  to Crown Court judges as to who to approach applications such  as this.  I do not propose to repeat that guidance, but I have it  very much in mind.   9. In summary, I have t o balance the interests of the public in the  full reporting of criminal proceedings against the desirability of  not causing harm to a child concerned in the proceedings.   10. I start with the factors relied on in support of the  application.  The context is,  of course, the open justice principle.   There is a strong public interest in open justice.  This includes  the reporting of criminal proceedings, including the identity of  defendants.  Exceptions to the open justice principle should be  confined to what is necessary to protect other, competing  interests.   11. Against that background, Evening Standard and Central  News rely, in particular, on the following matters: (a) Knife  crime is rightly a matter of considerable public concern at  present (b) To a lesser ext ent, identifying the defendant to  proceedings is part of the reporting of proceedings in any case  and the naming of defendants who have been convicted of knife  crime has a deterrent effect.    12. I have listened to the arguments and considered the law  and I have taken all relevant factors into account.  In doing so, I Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      bear in mind that it is suggested that there is a risk of reprisals to  A’s family and that there have been threats made to them.   13. Overall, I consider that the balance comes down in  favour o f allowing the application to report the name of A and I  do so. I am satisfied to the required standard that the two  condition in section 45(5) are met”.     81. In our judgment it is clear that the judge directed herself correctly on the law by  reference to both  Markham  and Pearce ; and it not arguable that she was unaware of the  substantial weight to be given to the child’s interests and welfare. The case law the  judge considered repeatedly emphasises that very weighty interest and the judge made  specific referen ce to the child welfare considerations in her ruling. Further, the judge  expressly identified the public interest factors relied upon by the media and applied the  balancing test. We note that judgment in Aziz was handed down on 17 September 2019,  a few day s therefore before the judge’s ruling. It did not however alter or modify the  principles to be derived from the cases cited by the judge   82. Although the judge’s reasons could have been more detailed, we do not consider her  decision was plainly wrong on the ma terial she considered or that she failed to take into  account the evidence before her.   83. We must however consider whether the additional evidence now relied on would have  justified maintaining the applicant’s anonymity in a fresh balancing exercise.   84. Two points should be made. First, in our judgment, the additional evidence does not  add anything new; instead it relies on essentially the same points as were in evidence  before the judge, particularly, the welfare of the applicant’s family. Second, what i s  now said does not materially assist the applicant. The identities of the family members  are well -known by those who might cause them harm. Not naming the applicant would  not give his family any greater protection than that which the Local Authority have  provided by relocating them. We are also not persuaded that identifying the applicant  will create further conflict within the community: it is plain that those who are already  causing conflict (gang members) already, and know well, his identity.   85. As for th e applicant’s rehabilitation, which is capable of being an important factor, as  in Markham (see para 89) there is no specific evidence before us, nor was there before  the judge, that the reporting of the applicant’s identity would adversely affect his futu re  rehabilitation. In reaching this conclusion we have considered the material before the  judge and the additional evidence. Other than highly generalised assertions to the effect  that “publication of his identity will impact on his future progress and reh abilitation”,  no particulars are given as to how this affects the issue of the maintenance of the  applicant’s anonymity until he reaches the age of 18 in July 2022. The length of time  before the child affected reaches 18 is a relevant consideration: see Ma rkham at para  89. In this case, the applicant would (absent the Excepting Direction) enjoy about 18  months more of anonymity. He is also due to serve a minimum of 15 years in custody.  In these circumstances, it is difficult to see how naming him now will i nhibit his  rehabilitation. No written or oral argument (or evidence) grappled with this issue. On Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      the other side of the balance is the substantial public interest in reporting horrific gang  related murders such as the present and the open justice principle .   86. Looking at the matter in the round we do not consider that the judge’s decision was  wrong, either on the material before her, or with the benefit of the additional evidence  which has been put before this court. We would add that it is not necessary in e very  case to demonstrate as some form of condition of removal of anonymity that the public  needs to know the defendant’s identity in order to understand the case. Each case  depends on its own facts. The case-specific  balance between the open justice princi ple  and the welfare rights of the child in issue on the facts of the case was underlined in  Markham at para 84.   87. Finally, we should address the submission that anonymity cannot be removed unless  the facts are “exceptional”. In our judgment, though the facts  in cases such as Markham  and Aziz were indeed truly shocking, there is no rule of law or iron clad principle which  requires this to be the case before an excepting direction can be made. So, when the  Court of Appeal in Aziz observed at para 43  that the cr ime was regarded by the judge  as “exceptionally serious”, and explained at para 41, that Markham was “exceptional  on its facts” it was not identifying some form of additional condition that had to be  satisfied before an excepting direction could be made. In our judgment, this approach  is not inconsistent with the principles we have summarised at para 67 above: these give  very substantial weight to the interests of the child which is why it will be rare for an  excepting direction to made.   88. The fact that such murders are now so common cannot be sensibly prayed in aid to say  that there is nothing “exceptional” about this murder, even if, contrary to our view,  there was some form of exceptionality requirement.  We note the statistics presented  on behalf of t he media in this case that knife crime in England and Wales was at a  record level in September 2020,  and that offences recorded involving a knife or sharp  instrument are now at the highest level ever recorded. This issue is clearly a matter of  substantial  public interest.     Reasons   89. We can deal with this matter briefly. We consider the judge’s reasons could have been  more detailed, in particular as they addressed the factors telling in favour of continued  anonymisation.  However, we do not consider her rulin g fell below public law  standards. On a fair reading, it is clear that she did consider the relevant welfare  considerations in coming to her decision and the importance of the child’s interests  emphasised in Markham at para 36.  90. By way of conclusion on the judicial review application, we grant permission to apply  for judicial review. However, applying section 31(2A) of the Senior Courts 1981 we  are satisfied that the outcome for the applicant would have been the same even if there  had been no procedural unfa irness. Taking into account the additional evidence before  us, the judge’s decision was not plainly wrong. The judicial review claim is accordingly  dismissed.  Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  KL v Regina      Conclusion     91. Sitting as the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division, the application for leave to appeal  against sentence is refused. Sitting as the Divisional Court, we grant permission to  apply for judicial review but dismiss the claim. The stay of the Excepting Direction  will  be removed, subject to any further applicatio ns. 