High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  1 Neutral Citation Number:  [2024] EWHC 39 (Comm)     Claim  No: CC -2023 -MAN -000069     IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE   BUSINESS AND PROPERTY COURTS IN MANCHESTER   CIRCUIT COMMERCIAL COURT (KBD)   Before His Honour Judge Pearce si tting as a Judge of the High Court     BETWEEN:     GOVDATA LIMITED   Claimant     -and-     INDEED UK OPERATIONS LIMITED   Defendant     - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -    Mr IAN SKEATE instructed by  way of direct access  for the Claimant      MS CLAIRE OVERMAN  instructed by  Lewis Silk in LLP for the Defendant     Hearing date: 1 November 2023   Judgment handed down : 12 January 2024   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  JUDGMENT      High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  2 INTRODUCTION   1. The Claimant is a company that (according to its website) is a market leader in Public  Sector business and provides  speci alist advice to assist  companies  that are looking to  gain access to government business.   2. The Defendant  operates  an employment website,  that lists jobs and also provid es a  facility  for the anonymous  posting of  information  about employers . From  the material  in the hearing bundle , it would appear that those posts are typically from ex-employees  speaking of their experience of working for the particular company  - certainly the four  reviews identified by the Claimant in this case are said to come fr om its former  employees .   3. The Claimant contends that certain anonymous reviewers have posted  reviews that are  critical of the Claimant  and its management on the Defendant’s website. It alleges  that  those reviewers  are (or at least may  be) guilty  of wrongdoing  vis-a-vis the Claimant (or  certain employees of the Claimant). It brings this claim  in an attempt to identify putative   wrongdoers on the basis that it has no other way of identifying  them. The order sought  is broadly speaking of a kind that has been developed by the court in a line of cases ,  generally known as Norwich Pharmacal orders.   4. In accordance with other courts that have dea lt with applications  similar to this, I shall   call the anonymous reviewers the “targets .” This is  in the sense that their identity is the  target of this application .   5. At the beginning of this hearing, I ruled that, notwithstanding the parties’ names had  been anonymised in the court list, there was no good basis for anonymising them in the  judgment. I gave my reasons for that ruling at the time. Accordingly, the parties may be  identified by name.   THE CLAIM AS PLEADED   6. This claim is brought pursuant  to CPR Part 8. The Claim Fo rm, issued on 8 September  2023,  pleads the Claimant’s case as follows:   “The Defendant, via its operation on the website www.indeed.com has facilitated the  wrongdoing of others in that forum  on dates between 01/01/2018 to 28/02/2023.  The  wrongdoing comprised of statements about the Claimant published on the website by High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  3 the forum users whose identities are currently unknown to the Claimant. The statements  contain seriously defamatory allegations about the Claimant.   The Claimant is entitled to seek redress in relation to the statements which contain  seriously defamatory allegations .   The Claimant wishes to inspect the information requested so as to be able to take legal  action or seek other redress .  The Defendant is able to provide the information from which the individuals identities   can be ascertained .   The Claimant is not able to identify the persons responsible for the postings unless the  Defendant provides the requested information .”   7. The order  sought by the Claimant is put in these terms  in its Draft Order:   “The Respondent must by 4.00pm on 18th August 2023 carry out a reasonable search  to locate the information sought below and make and serve on the Applicant a witness  statement stating whether that Information is now in its control, and to the extent that  such information was once but is no longer in its control and what has happened to that  information.   1.1 We require all personal identifiers of the publishers of the posts on Indeed of the  reviews detailed at pages 2 to 5 of the bundle containing the comments we wish to take  further legal action on. These include but are not exclusive to the registrants name, age,  location, IP address, telephone and mobile numbers and email addresses. We  additionally require information on whether they have logged into or created an identity  via a 3rd party identity verification such as Facebook or google in order to create an  account. (the Information).   2 The Applicant has permission to use the information provided pursuant to this Order  for the purposes of bringing proceedings for Defamation, libel and any other such  actions we are so advised to pursue in respect of untrue and malicious information  poste d against the company and its employees/shareholders/directors .”  8. The Claimant relies in suppo rt of the application  on statements from  its Chief Executive  Officer,  Mr Christian  Victor  Hugo , dated 21 March 2023 and 26 October 2023 and from  its Chief Operating Officer, Ms Kelly Ann Hugo , dated 5 May 2023 and 26 October  2023.  The Defendant relies on statements from Mr Thomas Dowling of Indeed  Ireland High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  4 Operations  Ltd dated 25 October  2023 and Ms Anne Mannion of its solicitors of the  same date.   AMENDMENT   9. By Application  Notice dated 23 October 2023, the Claimant applie d to add  Mr Christian   Victor  Hugo and Ms Kelly Ann  Hugo  as Claimants . Mr Hugo is identified  in some of  the reviews  by job title, though Ms Hugo is not. Nevertheless  it might be arguable  that  they are people  to whom the reviews are referring and therefore might be relevant   Claimants.    10. If, as the Claimant contends, this claim is good without the addition of Mr Hugo and  Ms Hugo , their addition as Claimants would not be necessary  because Gov Data itself   would  be able to achieve  the remedy it seeks . If, as the Defendant  contends,  the claim  is doomed to failure for re asons unrelated to the fact that Mr and Ms Hugo are not  parties, their  addition to the claim would add nothing.   11. It is only if the underlying claim is otherwise good but fails for want of joinder of one  or both of Mr and Ms Hugo that their addition to the claim would be  necessary  to  achieve the Claimant’s purposes . Accordingly, I propose to consider the claim to  determine whether this is so before determining  the amendment application .  12. There is a second manner in which the Claimant  seeks to change the way it puts this  application , albeit that in this respect there is no formal application before the court.   The Claim Form does not identify  which reviews the Claimant say s should  be the  subject of the order sought. The Draft Order provided on the application  seeks the  disclosure  of “all personal identifiers of the publishers of the posts on Indeed of the  reviews detailed at pages 2 to 5 of the bundle containing the comments we wish to take  further legal action on .” This is a reference to the four reviews which  appear at pages   17 to 21 of the Hearing Bundle  (Reviews  1, 2, 3 and 4 respectively ). Those Reviews  are dealt with individually below.   13. However, i n his oral submissions, Mr Skeate  for the Claimant invited the court  to make  a broader order, identifying other anonymous reviewers  who had used the Defendant’s  website.  The existence of other reviews that have been removed  from the website is  referred to in paragraph  9 of Mr Hugo’s witness statement of 21 March 2023, and indeed  in that statement he refers to obtaining relief in respect of other reviews.  High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  5 14. I dea l further below with the lack of detail of other reviews in respect  of which  the  Claimant  seeks an order . There is of course nothing to prevent  a party seeking an order   on different terms than the draft that it produces  in its application , but the failure to  produce a draft order encompassing  the other reviews creates considerable difficulty in  making such an order . There can be no doubt that  a Norwich Pharmacal  Order in respect  of anonymous reviews which could no longer be shown to the court would  require  careful  drafting to ensure that the Defendant was clear as to what it was obliged to  disclose.   THE LAW – NORWICH PHARMACAL ORDERS   15. The requirements  for Norwich Pharmacal  orders are not in issue. They are  summarised   in Mitsui  & Co Ltd  v Nexen Petroleum  Ltd [2005] EWHC 625 (Ch) at [21]:  “(i) a wrong  must have been carried out, or arguably carried out, by an ultimate  wrongdoer;   (ii) there must be a need for an order to enable action to be brought  against the  ultimate  wrongdoer ;  (iii) the person against  whom the order is sought must  be (a) mixed up in so as to  have facilit ated the wording; and (b) be able or likely  to be able to provide the  information  necessary to enable the ultimate  wrongdoer to be sued .”  16. If these requirements are met, the Court  has a discretion  whether to make the order  sought.  The court  should only make an or der if it is necessary and proportionate in all  the circumstances  (see Ashworth  Hospital Authority  v MGN Ltd  [2002] UKHL 29 ). In  Rugby Football Union v Viagogo Ltd  [2012] UKSC 55,  the Supreme Court  identified   ten non -exhaustive  factors to  which  the court should have regard in  determining  the  grant of relief:   a. the strength of the possible cause of action contemplated by the applicant for  the order;   b. the strong public interest in allowing an applicant to vindicate their legal rights;   c. whether the making of the order will deter similar wrongdoing in the future;   d. whether the information could be obtained from another source;   e. whether the respondent to the application knew or ought to have known that  they were facilitating arguable wrongdoing;  High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  6 f. whether the order might reveal the names of innocent persons as well as  wrongdoers, and if so whether such innocent persons will suffer any harm as a  result;   g. the degree of confidentiality of the information sought;   h. the privacy rights under article 8 of the European Convention for the Protection  of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of the individuals whose identity  is to be disclosed;   i. the rights and freedoms under the EU data protection regime of the individuals  whose identity is to be disclosed;   j. the public interest in maintaining the confidentiality of journalistic source s.  17. The decision in Viagogo  involved  consideration  of the privacy of potential  wrongdoers   who were allegedly selling rugby tickets  at more than their face value. Whilst it clearly  involved  issues of privacy, it did not, unlike the instant case, involve  any issue  of  freedom  of expression.   18. The particular  factors  in play in cases that do involve  arguments  about freedom  of  expression  were considered by Nicklin  J in Davidoff v Google  [2023] EWHC 1958.  Like this case, the claimant s in Davidoff  were seeking to identify  targets  who had posted   anonymous  reviews (in that case , reviews  of a firm of estate agents). Again as in  this  case, the claimants stated an inten tion to commence proceedings  in defamation and/or  malicious falsehood ( though  as we shall note later, certain  other causes of action  may  be in play here).  Having  noted that the order sought raised  issues under  both Article  8  (respect for private and family life) and Article 10 (freedom of expression)  of the  European  Convention  on Human Rights , Nicklin  J stated at [ 30]:  “Article 10 protects both speech by an identified individual and anonymous speech.  Whilst anonymity on the Internet can be used as a cloak behind which to harm others  by unlawful acts, not all anonymous speech is of this character. Such speech,  particularly in a political context, as a dimension of freedo m of expression, can have a   real value and importance. It also has a long pedigree both in the United Kingdom and   the United States...  “  Nicklin  J went on to state: High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  7 “[31] As a starting point …, where a  Norwich Pharmacal  order is sought to unmask an  anonymous online poster, the terms of that order are likely to interfere with the privacy  interests of the target. Depending on the nature of the speech, for example if anonymity  is (or maybe) being used to avoid recrimination/retribution/punishment (e.g.  a whistle - blower), it may also interfere with the Article 10 rights of the target (and  the  respondent) , see e.g.  Standard Verlagsgesellschaft mbH. ”  In applying the Viagogo factors, the court  was required to focus on whether there was  sufficient justification  for interference with Article 8 and/or 10 rights. He said at [3 3]:  “An intense focus on the comparative importance of the specific rights being claimed  requires an applicant for a  Norwich Pharmacal  order to demonstrate more than simply  an arguable case that s/he has been the subject of a civil wrong. S/he must show that a  claim that has sufficient weight or substance to outweigh the countervailing rights of  the target.  Viagog o factor (1) requires, an assessment of the strength of the underlying  claim relied upon, which is consistent with the obligation to examine the claim  articulated in  Standard Verlagsgesellschaft mbH . For practical purposes, this means  that an applicant applying for  Norwich Pharmacal  relief must demonstrate, in the  evidence in support of application, that s/he has, at least, a claim with a real prospect  of success.”    Nicklin  J warn ed at [41]:   “In most cases, proper respect for (and protection of) any engaged Article 10/8 rights  is likely to be achieved by the Court making a careful assessment of whether there has  been an arguable wrong and the strength of the identified cause(s) of action, and  whether the public interest in allowing an applicant to vindicate his legal rights is   outweighed by any countervailing interests of the target. Norwich Pharmacal orders  will not be granted, speculatively to strip away online anonymity, unless the Court is  satisfied that justice requires it. The danger of too lax an approach is obvious. The  subject of an unfavourable publication may have many reasons for wanting to identify  his/her online critic, not all of which would provide a justification for a Norwich  Pharmacal order. The jurisdiction is not to be used to satisfy curiosity o r to enable any  form of revenge or retribution. It exists to do justice by  enabling someone who can  demonstrate that s/he has been the victim of an arguable wrong, for which s/he wishes   to seek legitimate redress, to obtain an order from the Court that wil l assist him/her to  do so by assisting in the identification of the wrongdoer .” High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  8 19. In determining  whether any particular  cause of action against a target has a re al prospect  of success  for the purpose of making an order of the kind sought here against a third  party, the Claimant  invites  me to apply the same test as that applied on applications  for  summary judgment , which is usually identified  by reference to Swain v Hillman  [2001]  1 All ER 91 (though the court  should also bear in mind  the factors referred to by  Lewison J in Easyair v Opal Telecom  [2009] EWHC 339 and the other cases usefully  summarised at [24.3.2] and [24.3.3] of the White Book) . I accept that this is the test that  Nicklin J  set in Davidoff  for a claimant to obtain  relief in this kind of case. However,  he was cle arly not saying that it was  sufficient  in order for relief to be granted that the  claimant  show  an arguable case , since his warning in paragraph 41 of his judgment   would be redundant  were that so . Rather , he was identifying  the Swain v Hillman  test  as a threshold  criterion. Even if the Claimant show s an arguable  case, it is necessary  that the court  also conduct  the assessment referred to at [41] of Davidoff  before granting   relief.   THE PROSPECTIVE CAUSES OF ACTION  AGAINST THE TARGETS   20. The Claim Form identified defamation  as the prospective cause of action against the  targets. Mr Hugo’s  statement might be taken to suggest  that malicious falsehood is in  the contemplation  of the Claimant as a potential  claim and reference is made to  harassment. Mr Skeate ’s skeleton argument mentions , in addition  to defamation and  malicious  falsehood , the possibility of claims in harassment,  assault,  breach of  employment  contract , breach of privacy  and what are described as  “the economic torts .”  In addition, in correspondence  the Claimant has referred to the possibility  of claims   based on misfeasance  in public  office  and “ computer misuse.”   21. It is relevant to consider the elements of these cause s of action in turn  in order  to  consider  whether the Claimant shows that it has a real prospect of success .  22. In respect  of a claim in defamation , I rely on the summary  of law in Davidoff  at [47] to  [54].The signi ficant parts of that judgment may be summarised , as far as  relevant to the  instant claim,  as follows:   a. Such a claim would require evidence that:   i. a statement had been made that refer s to the Claimant ;  ii. the statement was published by the target ; High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  9 iii. the statement was defamatory of the Claimant ;  b. The test of whether a statement  is defamatory  was set out by Warby LJ in Millett  v Corbyn  [2021] EMLR 19 at [9]:   “At common law, a meaning is defamatory and therefore actionable if it satisfies  two requirements. The first, known as ‘the consensus requirement ,’ is that the  meaning must be one that ‘tends to lower the claimant in the estimation of right - thinking people generally ‘The Judge has to determine ‘whether the behaviour  or views that the offending statement attributes to a claimant are contrary to  common, shared values of our society’: Monroe v Hopkins  [2017] 4 WLR 68  [51]. The second requirement is  known as th e ‘threshold of seriousness .’ To be  defamatory, the imputation must be one that would tend to have a ‘substantially  adverse effect’ on the way that people would treat the claimant: Thornton v  Telegraph Media Group Ltd  [2011] 1 WLR 1985 [98]... ”  c. At common law , once these ma tters are established , falsity, malice and damage  are presumed in favour of the Claimant.  This would  equally  apply to their  claims, were Mr and/or Ms Hugo to be added as c laimants.   d. However , by reason of section 1 of the Def amation Act 2013  where (as here)  the Claimant trades  for profit, it must also show that “the publication has caused  or is likely  to cause serious harm to the reputation of the claimant. ” The  “serious harm ” requirement  is not met  unless the harm to the claimant’s  reputation  “has caused or is likely to cause the body serious financial loss .”  This requirement would not apply to Mr and Mrs Hugo , were they to be  joined  as claimants  in the action.   23. Again, in respect  of the tort of m alicious  falsehood , I refer to the judgment of Nicklin J  in Davidoff , this time at [55]  to [62]  summarising  the relevant principles  as being:  a. The Claimant must show  that:  i. a statement ha s been made that refers to the Claimant , its property or  business ;  ii. the statement was false ;  iii. the statement was published by a target ;  iv. the statement was published  maliciously . High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  10 b. The Claimant must  also show that it has suffered special damage,  unless “the  words upon which the action is founded are calculated to cause pecuniary  damag e” to the claimant (section 3(1) of the Defamation Act 1952).  As the  Court of Appeal makes clear in George v Cannell  [2022] EWCA Civ 1067, this  requirement  will be met if the statement of which complaint is made is “of such  a nature that, viewed objectively in context at the time of publication, financial  loss is an inherently probable consequence or, putting it another way, financial  loss is something that would probably follow naturally in the ordinary course  of ev ents.”    24. The time limit for bringing a claim in defamation or malicious falsehood is, by virtue  of Section 4A of the Limitation Act 1980, one year  from the date of publication. It will  be noted that two of the four reviews identified by the Claimant as allegedly defamatory  were published more than one year before the issue of the instant proceedings; a claim  against the target in respect of any of them wo uld by now be time barred by the  operation of Section 4A. Section 32A of the Limitation Act 1980 allows the court  to  disapply Section 4A. Sharp LJ said of this power in Bewry v Reed Elsevier UK Ltd   [2014] EWCA Civ 1411:   “The discretion to disapply is a wide one, and is largely unfettered: see Steedman v  BBC [2001] EWCA Civ 1534; [2002] EMLR 17 at 15. However  it is clear that special  considerations apply to libel actions which are relevant to the exercise of this discretion.  In particular, the purpose of a libel action is vindication of a claimant’ s reputation. A  claimant who wishes to achieve this end by swif t remedial action will want his action  to be heard as soon as possible. Such claims ought therefore to be pursued with vigour,  especially in view of the ephemeral nature of most media publications. These  considerations have led to the uniquely short limita tion period of one year which  applies to such claims and explain why the disapplication of the limitation period in  libel actions is often described as exceptional.”   25. In respect  of the tort of h arassment :  a. This arises under section 1 of the  Protection  from Harassment Act 1997  (“the  1997 Act”)  where :  i. a person (that is to say an individual – see section 7(5) of th e 1997  Act)  pursues a course of conduct  which amounts to harassment ; and  High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  11 ii. that person knows or ought to know that the course of conduct amount  to harassment of the other.   b. “Harassment” fo r this purpose includes alarming a person or causing  them  distress  – see Section 7(3) of the 1997 Act.   26. A claim in assault might be made out if the Claimant showed that a target had used or  threatened unlawful violence  towards the Claimant .  27. Claims in b reach of contract  require of course evidence of the target having bre ached  an identified  contractual term. It is suggested  in oral submissions  that the targets might  be in breach of terms as to confidentiality in their employment contracts . However,  neither the contractual  terms nor the alleged manner of breach is set out.    28. As regards a breach of privac y claim, t he suggestion  that domestic tort law protects  privacy in general terms is open to debate. This judgment is certainly not the place to  have such a debate . I accept that English law provides some protection against the  unwarranted publication of private information.   29. The Claimant has refer red to a claim  based on “the economic  torts.” The possible  signi ficance of such tor ts has been suggested in no more than this generic way  in the  Claimant’s skeleton argument . In his oral submissions , Mr Skeate  accepted that it was  not possible on the material before  the court to suggest that any c onspiracy could be  alleged, but he argue d that the  reviews might amount to an unlawful means tort.  This  tort, carefully analysed in OBG v Allen  [2007] UKHL 21 , was described by Lord  Hoffman at [51] of his judgment as consisting of “acts intended to cause loss to the  claimant by interfering with the freedom of a third party in a way which is unlawful as  against that third party and which is intended to cause loss to the claimant. ” As the  House of Lords had held in OBG v Allen  and the Supreme Court confirmed in Secretary  of State for Health v Servier Laboratories  [2021] UKSC 24, it is central to this tort that  the unlawful means have affected the third party’s freedom to deal with the claimant.   30. Misfeasance  in public  office has been  said by the Law Commission ( see their  publication , “Misconduct in Public Office” 2020) to involve showing that a public  officer acting as such has , without reasonable  excuse of justification , wilfully  neglected  to perform their duty or wilfully misconducted  themselves to such a  degree as to an  amount to an abuse of the public ’s trust in  the office holder . High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  12 31. As to the vague assertion of a claim for “computer misuse ,” there are various respects   in which the use of computers for malign purposes or in unauthorised  circumstances   may amount to a tort. The Claimant has not identified  any especially  relevant  circumstances  so I cannot further identify what cause of action is here being referred  to. The Defendant s ays in its skeleton argument that the Claimant may be suggesting  that there is some criminal breach of the Computer Misuse Act 1990.   THE REVIEWS   32. As I have noted, t he Claimant has , in its draft  order,  identified  four reviews that are  specifically targeted:   Review (1) of 31.5.18 :  “Intense and stressful   I have been working here just a short while as an administrator. The  pressure is quite intense and I've not felt adequately supported. After  persevering a few weeks I handed in my notice to a bemused manager.  Not everything is as it appears until you begin  working in such a place.   Pros   Salary is ok for the location   Cons   Very very stressful and lack of support”   In reply to that review, the fol lowing was posted  on 6 June 2018 :   “Official response from GovData   This is not a truthful comment as you only worked here for 4 weeks and  had in that time scale had lied about your skill set and also used  personal data for your own benefit therefore I was not bemused when  you handed in your notice the day after you had your warning about  using personal data and al so that you were not trustworthy to continue  to be working within a HR/Recruitment area.   As for the fact you say you were not support you claimed that you were  management level therefore had wages to that standard and this was  clearly not true. The only thing that bemused anyone within the whole  office was the fact that you were not terminated  straight away for gross High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  13 misconduct after abusing other staff members details for your own  gains. As was clearly stated in the written notice you were given.   I do hope the next place you become employed is not fooled by your lies  and ensures that you can actually do the work you say you can and that  no personal data is available to you.”    Review  (2) of 14.8.21:   “Extremely toxic environment   Bad management that borders on being abusive to it's employees and a  toxic workplace culture that encourages a frightening level of contempt  between staff. All of which encouraged by the CEO. Avoid this company  at all costs.   Pros   Free parking   Cons   Hostile management & CEO, No training ”  Review (3) of 29.9.22:   “Negative Experience   “I did not have a good time at GovData. There is a lot of pressure to  perform at all times but with very little training or coaching. If the CEO  likes you then you'll be fine, but he doesn't seem to like many people.  Lots of overtime expe cted as standard and no time owing can be taken.  A culture of fear and paranoia instilled from the top.   Pros   Nice office, could bring my dog to work   Cons   Overtime on most days, CEO's leadership style is undesirable”   Review  (4) of 8.1.23   “Don't even bother applying.   The culture at this company is shocking. I come  to the  conclusion that  the only reason this company  still has  employees is because they've been  made to feel so worthless that they think they can't do any better . High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  14 Management your typical incompetent bosses that got where they are by  default in the 90s. Nothing spectacular but working here isn't worth  dealing with that  until you  find something else.   Pros   Easy to get to, Parking   Cons   Poor Management, High Staff Turnover”   33. As to other revie ws of which the Claimants complain, there is next to no detail within  the evidence  as to the content of the reviews.  The high water  mark of the  particularisation  of these reviews is paragraphs 7 , 8 and 10 of Mr Hugo’s first witness  statement :  “[7] This matter arises due to the publishing on Indeed of frequent, malicious, untrue  and damaging and hurtful allegations on the Indeed website by anonymous ‘user(s)’  who make a range of statements collectively against the company, GovData Ltd, and  variously, personalised to myself, other colleagues, managers, shareholders. The  current various fake reviews are attached at pages 2 to 5 of the bundle .  [8] These comments began several years ago. Despite frequently complaining to Indeed  and seeking removal, which was done on several occasions, the abuse is a campaign of  hate and harassment, damaging to the business, and to the reputation and mental health  of employees, including those personally targeted. In fact, it  has reached a point where  even unbeknownst to the directors and other staff, some staff have taken it upon  themselves to personally object to the way in which the company is being defamed …  [10] The allegations continue to be made, and some are removed whilst others, entirely  at the whim of the publisher, Indeed, remain there to damage our business and persons.  The reviews are becoming increasingly fanciful but vicious and abusive in nature as we  continue to try and navigate post Covid growth. We need to know who this individual  or individuals working in collusion are so that we can bring proceedings against them  for personal reputational damage and clear financial damages for the company. ”  Although the reviews  referred to at the end of paragraph  7 of the statement are in fact  simply those reviews referred to in paragraph 32 above, it would seem from the  reference to reviews that have been removed and to the fact that such reviews are High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  15 “personalised”  to several people other than Mr Hugo himself that he is in fact referring  to more than  simply  the four reviews set out above.    PRELIMINARY ISSUES   34. Some of the Claimant’s arguments can be dealt with swiftly and do not merit prolonged  consideration , in particular :  a. The suggestion  of collusion  between reviewers ;  b. The suggestion  that the review ers are “ entirely  fake”:   c. The attempt by the Claimant to rely on reviews other than the four set out at  paragraph  32 above;   d. The Claimant’s reliance on causes of action other than defamation and malicious  falsehood.   35. It will be noted from the passage in paragraph 10 of Mr Hugo’s first witness statement  that he speaks of reviewers “ working in collusion.”  There is no direct evidence that  reviewers have in some way worked together to criticise the Claimant or to cause it  harm. The content of the four identified reviews does not show any clear indication of  collusion – whilst all four contain  criticism of the management of the Claimant  company, the criticism is in different terms . Mr Hugo, as CEO is identified  for particular  criticism in reviews [2] and [3], but again  the criticism is not in the same terms.  Moreover  each of the reviews  contains at least some positive as well as negative  comment. Whilst the positive  comments would be unlikely to outweigh the negative  points in the eye of a reader who was thinking of applying for  a job with the Claimant,  the overall tone of the reviews simply doe s not point to collusion.   36. During the course of his oral submissions for the Claimant, Mr Skeate acknowledged  that he was not able to show prima facie evidence of some conspiracy between the  reviewers to target the Claimant, though he argued that the order sought might lead to  the d isclosure of information that showed there was collusion between the targets. It is  undoubtedly the case that there is insufficient material before the court to show an  arguable case of conspiracy between the reviewers  whether of the identified reviews or  of other reviews .   37. On a separate issue, a t paragraph 14 of his witness statement, Mr Hugo speak s of the  revie wers in these terms : High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  16 “these  people, from the timings, language and even job titles of the individuals are  entirely fake and have no correlation to anyone genuinely leaving our firm .”  This is a surprising  assertion  given that, in respect  of review [1], the Claimant appears  from the response to have identified  the author  as a former employee in respect  of  whose behaviour  the Claimant was critic al. During the course of his submissions, Mr  Skeate  dealt with the assertion that this response seemed to show that the Claimant  knew who the author was  (a matter of some relevance given the second criterion  referred to in Mitsui v Nexen ). In reply to the argument that there was no “ need” for an  order where the Claimant already knew the identity of the author of the review, he said   that the Claimant had no more than a suspicion  of the person’s identity at this stage and  needed the order sought to confirm that suspicion . I will return to that point  below, bu t  the ability of the Claimant to make even a guess at the author as a former employee  contradicts Mr Hugo’s comments that the people are “ entirely fake.”  Further, t he  assertion that the timings and/or language and/or job titles referred  to in the reviews  show them to be fake is not otherwise explained. If it is said to be true of the four  identified reviews , it was open to the Claimant to explain the assertion . Not only has it  failed to do so but its identification  of the author of the first review directly contradict s  the Claimant’s argument . If on the other hand it is said to be a reference to other reviews  that h ave been deleted, the Claimant has failed to provide any explanation  for what  information is said to show that the reviewers were fake.  There is no material fr om  which the Claimant can draw the  prima facie case that any of the reviews  (again whether  identified or not)  is not in fact a comment from an ex -employee , whatever its motivation   or purpose .   38. In so far as the Claimant seeks to rel y on reviews other than those particularised  in the  Claim Form, the claim as formulated cannot succeed. The failure to make even a  rudimentary attempt at drafting such an order demonstrates the weakness of the  Claimant’s position. The problem could be put in two different ways:   a. In the absence of any attempt to describe  the conten ts of the reviews  the court  has no basis to conduct the assessment anticipated in Davidoff  or even to  determine  whether the alleged claims against the targets have a real prospect of  success.  Mr Hugo’s desc ription in paragraph 7 of his first statement of  “frequent, malicious, untrue and damaging and hurtful allegations”  is far too  vague. High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  17 b. How could the court even frame  an order when it does not know the basics of  what the reviews are alleg ed to say  or to have said ? If the Claimant had made  some attempt to particularise  them , this might be possible, but absent any such  attempt, it would seem that the court would have to define the reviews which  the Defendant was obliged to respond to as those being any review which is  “critical ” of the Claimant, a definition  far to o wide to meet the targeted  circumstances in which this kind of order might  be made. Even that terminolo gy  might be said to  introduce a level of subjectivity and to be lax which is not  consistent with the  jurisprudence for the making of this kind of order.   39. The Claimant complains that, if the Court does not make the order sought, it is not in a  position to particularise  its case. However, the Claimant  must  have some material from  which  to have reached the conclusion that an order might be justified. On the Claimant’s  case, t hat might be limited to a person’s recollection  of what  was said  in a review that  has now been deleted , but to begin to meet the threshold requirements for bringin g a  claim , such a  person would have to be able to de scribe why they considered any  particular  review to be defamatory, a malicious falsehood or to fall within  any of the  other potenti al wrongs identified. If  the Claimant  does not attempt to do so, it would  appear that it is simply targeting  any review that is critical . This would clearly not come  close to satisfying  the Davidoff  test.  40. It follows that the Claimant is not entitled  to an order based upon reviews which have  not been identified  and wher e there h as been no attempt to particularise them. Given  the complete failure of attempt  to give particula rs, it is not necessary for the purpose of  this judgment to identify what particulars might suffice.    41. Further, if the application  were amended to add Mr and/or Ms Hugo  as Claimants , the  argument would be no stronger. An amendment  for this purpose would not be proper.   42. Accordingly, this application  can only succeed to the extent that the identified  reviews  referred to at paragrap h 32 above are shown to be the potential  subject of a claim against  the respective targets .  43. Further, in respect  of the identified  reviews, there is simply no material to support the  following causes of action:   a. Assault : none of the reviews involved  the use or threat of violence.  High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  18 b. Breach of contract : There is no identified  term as to obligations of  confidentiality . I accept that this may be difficult  where the targets  are not  identified (since the relevant employment contract could  not be  identified ) and  that in any event the contractual term as to confidentiality may be an implied   term that at least arguabl y was owed by any employee. However , there is no  material fr om which it can be concluded that any of the reviews involve d the  use of confidential  information and therefore even arguably amounted to a  breach of confidentiality   c. Breach of privacy : As I have indicated, there may be circumstances  in which  misuse  of private information is actionable in tort. Here however, no private  information is identified and any argument is bound  to fail.   d. “The economic torts :” I have noted above that the potential  relevance of such  tortious liability its said to lie in the possibility that there is an “unlawful means”  claim here. The difficulties in this argument are obvious. What are the alleged  unlawful  means ? Is this any more than simply restating the other tor ts which are  the subject matter of the claim, especially defamation and/or malicious  falsehood ? Mr Skeate was not able to identify  any way in which it could be said  that the reviews may have harmed  the Claimant other than by their direct  consequence on its reputation. In those circumstances , the tort here relied on  simply adds nothing to the other causes of action. In particular, I can see no  basis for moulding that tort to fit factual circumstances which  are in fact  actionable applying other well -established  tortious tests.   e. Misfeasance in public office : I do not see any possible  basis for invoking  this  tort. Apart fr om anything else, none of the targets  are alleged to be public office  holders  and none appear to have been acting in any public office.   f. “Computer misuse :” The Claimant’s complete failure to identi fy any alleged  tort leaves me incapable of judging this argument, though it is far from obvious   to me what tort could be relevant.  For example, if some offence under the  Computer Misuse Act 1990 were alleged, I would need to have explained what  the alleged offence is said to comprise and how that offence is actionable at the  suit of the Claimant. The case as currently particularised wholly fails to do  either.  High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  19 44. It follows  from the above that  the remainder  of this judgment deals only  with:  a. the four reviews expressly referred to;   b. the causes of action in defamation  and/or malicious  falsehood.   THE CLAIMANT’S CASE   45. In dealing with the various reviews,  the Claimant’s starting position  is that the  Defendant hold s the information that it seeks to assist in identifying  the reviewers . This  much is not in dispute.   46. Further, the Claimant contends  that it has no other means of identifying  the authors  of  the review s than by the voluntary disclosure of information by the Defendant (which it  will not provide) or by this Court making the order now sought.  Whilst this is not in  dispute in respect of reviews [2] to [4], the Claimant does seemingly have material to  identify  the author of review [1]. However, the Claimant contends that it  has no more  than a suspicion of the identity  of the author – the material sought fr om the Defendant  would conf irm their identity .  47. Yet f urther, the Claimant contends that the Defendant is “mixed up” in the wrongdoing  sufficient to justify an order being made. A s Nicklin  J noted at paragraph  102 of his  judgment in Davidoff , where a claim is brought  against the operator of a website on   which  the alleged wrongdoer  has posted an anonymous review, “ there is little doubt  that the website has become mixed up in the wrongdoing because it has, through its  platform or service, enabled and facilitated the publication complained of.” This  principl e applies her e.  48. It follows that, on the Claimant’s case, the court’s decision  as to whether  to grant an  order turns solely on the issue of the alleged wrongdoing of the targets , the other  threshold criteria having been met . The Claimant contend s that it s claims (whether  limited to those in defamation  and malicious falsehood  or more broadly covering the  other caus es of action identified  above) are more than merely  fanciful. The Claimant  can show a real prospect  of success in respect of each of the reviews.   49. In terms of the Davidoff  balancing exercise, the Claimant points  out first that, in that  case, Nicklin J identified the value of anonymous speech in the traditions of the United  Kingdom and the USA. At paragraph 30 he stated:  High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  20 “As the Court of Appeal noted in Motley Fool , Article 10 protects both speech by an   identified individual and anonymous speech. Whilst anonymity on the Internet can be  used as a cloak behind which to harm others by unlawful acts, not all anonymous  speech is of this character. Such speech, particularly in a political context, as a  dimension of freedom of expression, can have a real value and importance. It also has  a long pedigree both i n the United Kingdom and the United States. As Lord Neuberger  noted, extra judicially:   “It is unsurprising that the most robust protection of anonymous speech is to be  found in US law. In McIntyre v Ohio Elections Commission  (1995) 514 US 334,  a case on a statute prohibiting anonymous political literature, it was famously  said by Justice Stevens that:   ‘Under our Constitution, anonymous pamphleteering is not a  pernicious , fraudulent practice, but an honourable tradition of advocacy  and of dissent. Anonymity is a shield from the tyranny of the majority.’”   The modern equivalent of the anonymous pamphleteers of 200 years ago are  anonymous online commentators, such as “The Secret Barrister”, for whom anonymity  is an important dimension of the exercise of their rights of freedom of expression. ”   50. In contrast to the protection  of political or religious opinions , cases such as the instant  one are concerned with a  much lower level of freedom of expression in the context of  comments  that (it is said) harm and are intended to harm the commercial interest of the  Claimant, rather than to protect their own beliefs  or challenge the beliefs  of others . The  interests of the targets in their anonymity  are, on the Claimant’s case,  less worthy or  protection (or at least  worthly of less protection)  than those of the kind o f case that  Nicklin J had in mind in Davidoff .  51. Furthermore, the comments made here are (it is said  on behalf of the Claimant ) not  simply statements of opinion  but statements  (at least in part) of fact. The example  given  is the assertion  in review (2)  that the workplace culture is “ toxic”.  The Claimant  contends that, where the anonymous comments that are being targeted are statements  of fact (or at least mixed  statements  of fact and opinion ), the balance will more readily   fall in favour of making an order sought to identify the author. The r ationale  behind this  distinction is not entirely clear from the Claimant’s arguments although it would seem  to lie in the argument that it will be more straightforward  to prove that a statement is High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  21 actionable  as defamatory or a malicious falsehood if it is at least in part a statement of  fact.  52. The Claimant contends that there is evidence that reviews such as those on the  Defendant’s website  have caused damage to its business. In this regard , my attention is   drawn  to a document attached to Mr Hugo’s witness  statement, headed “ Reviews  Affecting Sales.”  The document purports to bring together a  number of sources  of  material as evidence that the Claimant’s business has been harmed by what people have  discovered from searc hing details of the Claimant’s business online.   THE DEFENDANT’S CASE   53. I have noted above that the Defendant accepts that it has the relevant  information  to  identify  the authors of the four identified reviews . It may have the information to  identify the authors of other anonymous reviews that have now been deleted, so long  as they are clearly identified1. Further , the Defendant does not dispute that, save in  respect  of review (1), the Claimant is unlikely to be able to obtain the information   necessary to trace  the target from any other source.  Yet further  the Defendant does not  dispute that it is “ mixed up ” in the alleged wrongdoing in a  manner that would make it  the potential subject of  a Norwich Pharmacal type order.   54. However, the Defendant contends that , when considering the balancing exercise  anticipated in Davidoff , the Claimant’s argument  fails adequately to de al with the rights  of the targets as anonymous posters  whilst overstating the strength of the cases against  the targets.    55. Dealing first with the claims that are intimated against the targets, the Defendant  contends that each of the claims is weak  even without consideration of the evidence of  any loss flowing from the alleged torts :  a. Of review (1), the Defendant points out that this claim is significantly  out of  time. The Claimant has known  (or at the very least has suspected that it knows)  the identify of the poster  for over 3 years , yet there is no evidence that it has  taken any s teps against that person,  whether to establish their identity with    1 I had understood during the hearing that the Defendant was able to identify the authors of now deleted reviews  so long as the reviews themselves are clearly identified. Having sent out this judgment in draft, I was told that this  was not necessarily the case and could only be known if the reviews themselves were first identified. Whilst this  may be a discrete arguable ground for refusing relief, I have not determined the case on this issue and would have  required further submissions if it had affected the outcome of the application. In the event it does not.  High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  22 greater certainty or to seek relief for the wrongdoing . Any argument for the  disapplication  of the limitation  period would be very weak . Of course, it would  be for the target of the current application to take that line of defence, but the  likelihood  of the point being successfully  taken must be very high. I n any event,  the Defendant contends th at it is far fr om cle ar that a statement  of the kind in  review (1)  that the pressure of a job is quite intense and that an employee  has  not felt supported are capable  of being defamatory  and/or of being shown to be  false . They are statements of the perception of the author not of objective fact .  Even if capable of being defamatory, the Defendant contends that it is not clear  to whom the statement is targeted. Is i t said to be defamatory of the Claimant  itself or of Mr/Mrs H ugo? If the latter, why would the reader of the comment  think it referred  to either of them?   b. Again, review (2) would be out of time for a claim in defamation or malicious  falsehood . Although the Claimant may not know the identity of the reviewer, it  has taken no steps until now to establish that identity. Further the language of  the review  is largely that of opinion rather than assertion of fact , though perhaps  not so obviously as review (1) . Whilst there is one reference to Mr Hugo as  CEO, th e review  is not highly critical of him  and arguably  would not make the  reader think less highly of him . The re is no reference to Ms Hugo or her role  in  the Claimant .  c. Yet again  review (3) would be out of time for  a claim in defamation  or malicious   falsehood  though  only marginally so such that the Defendant  would accept that  an argument  to permit the claim to continue under Section 32A of the Limitation   Act would be stronger. Further, like review (2), the Defendant accepts that  somewhat stronger language of this review may make a claim in defamation  or  malicious falsehood more arguable though again there is no express  reference  to Ms Hugo.   d. In respect of review (4) a claim against the author would have been in time if  brought  at or shortly after the hearing on 1 November  2023 so a limitation   argument is not likely to be a serious bar to the contemplated claim. However  the Defendant doubts that the contents of this review are capable of being held  to be defamatory or a false statement.  High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  23 56. Turning to t he right of privacy of the person  posting an anonymous  review, a t paragraph  31 of his judgment  in Davidoff , Nick lin J made clear that such posters have an interest  in their privacy. Th e Defendant contends that th is applies just as much to  someone  posting a review of  an estate agent whose services they have sued (as in Davidoff  itself)  or their fo rmer employee (as here) as it does to the political pamphleteer or indeed the  author of the Secret Barrister.   57. The Defendant asks me to bear in mind the terms upon which reviewers post on the  Defendant’s website. They include the following:   “1. The reviews you submit are anonymous .  …  3. Identifiable information is not shared with the company you review. However,  Indeed  may honor subpoenas, search warrants, law enforcement or court -mandated  requests  to disclose user content you have provided, your identity, or other  information.   4. These are your personal experiences and opinions, and those can be emotionally   charged. However, any content that is unlawful, fraudulent, discriminatory,  threatening, abusive, libelous, defamatory, obscene, or otherwise objectionable, or that  contains sexual, ethnic, racial, or other discriminatory slurs, or that does not include  relevant or constructive content is not allowed on Indeed and we reserve the r ight to  remove such content.”   58. It is apparent fr om this te xt that, whilst reviewers should realise that their identity might  be disclosed in certain circums tances, the expectation is that reviews will be  anonymous.   59. That is not to say that the anonymity of the poster is necessarily worthy of protection .  The Defendant acknowledges the passage at paragraph 112 of  his judgment in Davidoff ,  where Nicklin J said,  “where there is a real basis on which to suspect or conclude that  a person has used anonymity merely as an expedient by which s/he hopes to avoid  identification and the potential consequences of their online activity the Court is likely  to attach limited we ight to the need to protect that anonymity.”  However the use of  anonymity here is not an expedient to avoid the reviewers taking responsibility for their  words; rather it is the very condition that frees them to make the comments in  the first  place. It would be inimical to free speech to allow the disclosure of the identity of those High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  24 who would not post their comments if they believed that their identity would be  disclosed.   60. In the exercise  of the discretion  to make an order , the Defendant asks me to bear in  mind that, although the Claimant acted as a litigant in person until shortly before the  hearing before me, it has shown a degree of lega l sophistication , for example copying   in a legal email address to i ts correspondence . It has purported to express opinion s on  legal matters, for example in an email from Mr Hugo dated 24 October 2023 where he  says to the Defendant’s solicitors,  “I would welcome an explanation please. We wrote  to you today and to the court in reference to the requirement to amend the claim form  and the intent of your client to resist the amendment, necessitating an application to be  made. We will have counsel on th e day and shall seek our costs on an indemnity basis.  I see no reason whatsoever for your object ion, nor any validity in law. Further, in  response to your original correspondence and defence, I found it to be ill founded and  furthermore, outside of your client’ s boundaries as a party to these proceedings. It is  not for you to ‘pre -try’ a case of defamation, or for that matter any other ac tion that  may arise from unmasking the malicious and damaging allegations made on your  client’ s website.”  In so far as the Claimant seeks the indulgence of the court for lack of  specificity in its application, the cou rt should bear in mind that  it has behaved as though  it has either received legal advice or has relevant legal knowledge on the issues before  the court.   61. As to the argument that the reviews complained of have caused damage to the Claimant,  the witness statement of Anne Mannion exhibits several reviews fr om sources other  than the Defendant. At paragraph 11, she sets out various reviews on Googl e that show  some signi ficant dissatisfaction  with the Claimant from a variety of sources.  Overall,  she states that the average rating of the Claimant on Google is 4.1/5. This compares  with the average rating on the Defendant’s platform which, according to Mr Dowling’s   statement, is 4.5/5. This would suggest that the publications on the Defendant’s  platform a re likely to be a lesser cause of harm to the Claimant than those on Google.   62. The Defendant points out that this is consistent with the Claimant’s own material in the  document referred to at paragraph 52 above. None of the material in that document  indicates that it is reviews on the Defendant’s website that have caused potential  customers not to place business with the Claimant. I n so far as any specifi c reasons are  given , the sources cited are either reviews on Google or reports of Employment High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  25 Tribunal proceedings, neither of which are attributable to the reviews on the  Defendant’s site.   63. Further , the Claimant , in particular through the communications of Mr Hugo, has shown  itself willing to act aggressively to protect its position. A particularly  striking  example  of this is an email from Mr Hugo to one Dale Rowland  dated 12 April 2021 , which can  be seen online in a review posted by Mr Rowland on Google and  exhibited  by Ms  Mannion . The context  of this email is not clear, but the text in the bundle reads as  follows:   “You are a very rude and gutless little weasel. Never  write anything you wouldn't have  the guts to say  directly to someone's face.  Insulting me is fine, insulting my integrity as  a person, not my job role, I will respond to  appropriately. I will be back in the UK  shortly. You will  then be able to make your nasty spiteful immature  comments to my  face. As for your inadequate  understanding of what you were all told back in  December,  I will now refresh your very selective  memory.   If your brains were not in your arse you would be able  to add up, that the new closers  are now in month 5,  hence their last month was month 4, are you able to  count along  so far?    They fully understand their target is now in place, the sales team (who have been there  for 4 months and more) will also realise that. Yet you want to blame me? Are you sure  it isn't John, or Simon, or Brendan as previously?   In short everyone but pathetic little Dale. Typical shite inadequate salesperson,  remembers the bits that suit them and blame everyone else but themselves for their crap  performance. I am delighted you were too stupid to realise your mistake. Whether you  left now or at the end of April, the commission position would be no different.  Suggesting I don't honour contracts is not going to go down well AT ALL with me! You  cheeky lying little arsehole. You want to talk about contracts? Where was your  performance e ach month to hit targets? Did I ever personalise it with you or anyone  else? You want to get personal? No problem with me. Let's do that eh?   That's what you were employed to do. Failure. Stop snivelling and go and better  yourself for the benefit of your new employer. The fact you were prepared to take a non  commission and bonus paid role shows how you don't even have the self image of a  proper salesperson…”   High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  26 64. A similar  tone can be seen in the Claimant’s response  to one of the Google review s  from Mr Kishour Zahid .  65. Ms Mannion’s researches  also show that, if one searches on line against  the Claimant’s  name, one may well turn up reports of proceedings in the Employment  Tribunal. This  is of interest when one considers the points made within the Claimant’s document  headed “Reviews Affecting Sales,” in which customers who are said to have decided  against placing business with the Claimant refer not to reviews by former employees,  but, amongst  other things, reports of employment  tribunal hearings  and negative   reviews on Goo gle.   66. Taken together, this material would indicate that , not only is it unlikely, looked at  prospectively, that negative reviews on the Defendant’s platform , as opposed to the  contents of other reviews and other material available online,  would cause loss to the  Claimant (or Mr and Mrs Hugo), the evidence points in the direction that in fact any  losses that could be said to have arisen had other causes.   DISCUSSION   67. In considering the evidence as to loss, I bear in mind that the issue only arises a t an  interim stage and that the Claimant (and Mr and/or Ms Hugo, if they are joined  as  Claimants either in this case or in subsequent  litigation  against  the wrongdoers ) may be  able to marshal considerably more evidence as to the effect of the reviews. The  Claimant has clearly made some effort to show the effect of the reviews  on it, but, for  reasons identified by the Defendant and noted above, not only does it fail to show any   financial  loss attributable  to the reviews, its evidence tends to suggest that any loss  actually has other causes , such as reports  of proceedings in the Employment  Tribunal  and/or reviews on Google which can not be laid at the door of the Defendant’s platform .   68. Further, Mr and Ms Hugo have taken no steps to show that they  personally  have suffered  reputational  loss du e to the reviews. The y are therefore driven back on to the  presumption of loss . In respect of the  claim in defamation, that loss is presumed without  more, but in respect of the claim in malicious falsehood, it requires proof that the words  are calculated to cause pecuniary damage. I am satisfied that t here is no material before  the court from which that inference can be drawn.   69. It is of course  the case that, were the Claimant to obtain disclosure of the details of  reviewers, it might be able to find material to support its contention that comments were High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  27 made with intent to cause damage and/or its suspicion that there is collusion between  reviewers. The failure to make the order sought might therefore deprive the Claimant  of the ability to vindicate its rights.  This risk was recognised  by Nicklin J at paragraph   83 of his judgment  in Davidoff , but, as he said there, this does not relieve the Claimant  of the burden of proving the necessary  ingredients  of the tort on which it relies  in  support of the making of an order.   70. In considering the various reviews, I shall look at the contents of each and the evidence  that the Claimant, Mr Hugo and/or Ms Hugo have suffered any loss as a result of each  or all of them. In my judgment, the cases against the authors of each of the reviews,  whether in defamation  or in malicious  falsehood , are distinctly problematic , although  some are stronger than others . I shall deal with the reviews  one by one, subdividing  them according to potential cause of action and potential claimant.  Where I use the  word “ weak ,” I mean a claim or argument  that does not , on the material placed before  the court,  meet the Swain v Hillman  test of having a real prospect of su ccess.   71. Dealing with review (1), I consider this to be a very weak basis for a claim against any  of the Claimant, Mr Hugo and/or Ms Hugo for the following reasons.   a. Defamation  claim by the Claimant :  i. The claim is out of time under Section 4A of the Limitation Act 1980.  An application to extend time for bringing the claim under section 32A  of the Act would be very unlikely to succeed given for how long the  Claimant has at the very least suspected that it has known the identity of  the reviewer.   ii. The argument that this review is defamatory of anyone is weak since  it  contains  statements of opinion  or perception that would be difficult to  contradict.  It is not clear why those statements would have a  substantially adverse effect on how people would treat the Claimant , Mr  Hugo and/or Ms Hugo.   iii. The Claimant has poor prospects of showing  that the review has caused  serious harm to its reputation .  b. Malicious  falsehood  claim  by the Claimant : High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  28 i. The claim is out of time under Section 4A of the Limitation Act 1980.  An application to extend time for bringing the claim under section 32A  of the Act would be very unlikely to succeed given for how long the  Claimant has at the very least suspected that i t has known the identity of  the reviewer.   ii. The arguments that this review is false and/or was pub lished maliciously   are weak since  it contains  statements of opinion or perception that would  be difficult to contradict.   iii. There is no evidence to show that the Claimant, Mr Hugo and/or Ms  Hugo have  in fact  suffered pecuniary damage as a result of the  publication  and such material as there is would indicate that any losses  have other causes.   iv. There is no material from which to draw the conclusion that the words  were calculat ed to cause pecuniary damage to the Claimant , Mr Hugo  and/or Ms Hugo.   c. Defamation  claim by Mr Hugo :  i. As 71(a)(i) and (ii) for the Claimant. Also ,  ii. The reader would be very unlikely to understand this review to be a  reference to Mr Hugo as opposed to any other manager at the Claimant.   d. Malicious  falsehood  claim by Mr Hugo :  i. As 71(b)(i) , (ii), (iii)  and (i v) for the Claimant. Also,   ii. The reader would be very unlikely to understand this review to be a  reference to Mr Hugo as o pposed to any other manager at the Claimant.   e. Defamation  claim by Mrs Hugo :  i. As 71(a)(i)  and (ii) for the Claimant. Also,   ii. The reader would be very unlikely to understand this review to be a  reference to Ms Hugo as opposed to any other manager at the Claimant.   f. Malicious falsehood claim  by Mrs Hugo :  i. As 71(b)(i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) for the Claimant. Also,  High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  29 ii. The reader would be very unlikely to understand this review to be a  reference to Ms Hugo as opposed to any other manager at the Claimant.   72. Dealing with review (2) , I consider this to be a  weak  case as against the Claimant and  Mr Hugo, and to be very weak as against Ms Hugo.   a. Defamation claim by the Claimant :  i. The claim is out of time under Section 4A of the Limitation Act 1980.  An application to extend time for bringing the claim under section 32A  of the Act would be unlikely to succeed given the length of time since  the review was published.  The mere fact that the identity of the author  was not known does not greatly assist since no steps appear to have been  taken to identify the person earlier.   ii. The contents of the review are capable of being defamatory of the  Claimant and Mr Hugo  on the basis that they include factual assertions  relating to bad management in the Claimant and encouragement of this  by Mr Hugo  which may have a substantially adverse effect on the way  that people would treat the Claimant itself and/or Mr Hugo.   iii. The Claimant has poor prospects of showing that the review has caused  serious harm to its reputation.   b. Malicious falsehood claim by the Claimant :  i. The claim is out of time under Section 4A of the Limitation Act 1980.  An application to extend time for bringing the claim under section 32A  of the Act would be unlikely to succeed given the length of time since  the review was published. The mere fact that the identity of the author  was not known does not greatly assist since no steps appear to have been  taken to identify the person earlier.   ii. The contents of the review are capable of amounting to a malicious  falsehood actionable against the Claimant and Mr Hugo on the basis that  they include factual assertions relating to bad management in the  Claimant and encouragement of this by Mr Hugo.   iii. There is no evidence to show that the Claimant, Mr Hugo and/or Ms  Hugo have in fact suffered pecuniary damage as a result of the High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  30 publication and such material as there is would indicate that any losses  have other causes.   iv. There is no material from which to draw the conclusion that the words  were calculat ed to cause pecuniary damage to the Claimant , Mr Hugo  and/or Ms Hugo.   c. Defamation claim by Mr Hugo :  i. As 72(a)(i)  and (ii) for the Claimant.   d. Malicious falsehood claim by Mr Hugo :  i. As 72(b)(i), (ii), (iii)  and (i v) for the Claimant.   e. Defamation claim  by Mrs Hugo :  i. As 72(a)(i)  and (ii) for the Claimant.  Also,   ii. There is no material fr om which the reader would conclude that this  review referred to Ms Hugo.   f. Malicious falsehood claim by Ms Hugo :  i. As 72(b)(i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) for the Claimant.   ii. There is no material from which the reader would conclude that this  review referred to Ms Hugo.   73. Dealing with review (3) , I consider this to  be a weak claim  against the Claimant,  but to  give rise to an arguable  claim in defamation against  Mr Hugo and Ms Hugo.   a. Defamation claim by the Claimant :  i. The claim is out of time under Section 4A of the Limitation Act 1980.  However, since the present claim to identity  the target was brought  less  than 12 months fr om the date of publication, the court might apply  Section 32A in favour of the Claimant, Mr Hugo and/or Ms Hugo.   ii. The contents of the review are capable of being defamatory of the  Claimant, Mr Hugo and/or Ms Hugo on the basis that they include  factual assertions relating to a bad culture in the Claimant instilled “ from  the top”  which is capable of being a reference to Mr and/or Mrs Hugo , High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  31 and which would have a substantially adverse effect on the way that  people would treat the Claimant itself and Mr and/or Ms Hugo.   iii. The Claimant has poor prospects of showing that the review has caused  serious harm to its reputation.   b. Malicious falsehood claim by the Claimant :  i. The claim is out of time under Section 4A of the Limitation Act 1980.  However, since the present claim to identity the target was brought less  than 12 months from the date of publication, the court might apply  Section 32A in favour of the Claimant, Mr Hugo  and/or Ms Hugo.   ii. The contents of the review are capable of being proved false, in which  case they may be proved to have been made maliciously. They may be  taken to refer to Mr  and/or Ms Hugo as well as the Claimant itself on  the basis that they include factual assertions relating to a bad culture in  the Claimant instilled “ from the top”  which is capable of being a  reference to Mr and/or Mrs Hugo .  iii. There is no evidence to show that the Claimant, Mr Hugo and/or Ms  Hugo have in fact suffered pecuniary damage as a result of the  publication and such material as there  is would indicate that any losses  have other causes.   iv. There is no material from which to draw the conclusion that the words  were calculat ed to cause pecuniary damage to the Claimant, Mr Hugo  and/or Ms Hugo.   c. Defamation claim by Mr Hugo :  i. As 73(a)(i) and (ii) for the Claimant.  But also,   ii. Given the presumption s of falsity, malice and damage referred to at  paragraph 21(c) above and the fact that Mr and Ms Hugo are not trading   for profit, they may be able to make out a n arguable  cause of action in  defamation .   d. Malicious falsehood claim by Mr Hugo :  i. As 73(b)(i), (ii) (iii) and (iv) for the Claimant.  High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  32 e. Defamation claim by Ms Hugo :  i. As 73(a)(i) and (ii) for the Claimant.   ii. As 73(c)(ii) for Mr Hugo.   f. Malicious falsehood claim  by Ms Hugo :  i. As 73(b)(i), (ii) (iii) and (iv) for the Claimant.   74. Dealing with review (4) , I consider this to be a weak claim against each of the Claimant,  Mr Hugo and Ms Hugo.   a. Defamation claim by the Claimant :  i. The claim is out of time under Section 4A of the Limitation  Act 1980.  However an application  under Section 32A would have re asonable  prospect of success on the basis  that the claim to identify  the target was  made less than 12 months  after publication . The argument is the stronger  for the fact that, had a judgment favourable to the Claimant been handed  down ex tempore  at the hearing before me, any claim against the author  or review (4) might have been brought in time.   ii. The argument that this review is defamatory of anyone is weak since  it  contains  statements of opinion or perception that would be difficult to  contradict and which in any event do not obviously refer to Mr and/or  Ms Hugo. It is not clear why those statements would have a substantially  adverse effect on how people would treat Mr Hugo and/or Ms Hugo.   iii. The Claimant , Mr Hugo and Ms Hugo  have poor prospects of showing  that the review has caused serious harm to their reputation s.  b. Malicious falsehood claim by the Claimant :  i. The claim is out of time under Section 4A of the Limitation  Act 1980.  However an application  under Section 32A would have reasonable  prospect of success on the basis  that the claim to identify  the target was  made less than 12 months  after publication.   ii. The argument that this review is a malicious  falsehood  is weak since  it  contains  statements of opinion or perception that would be difficult to High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  33 contradict or to show as being made maliciously  and which in any event  do not obviously refer to Mr and/or Ms Hugo.   iii. There is no evidence to show that the Claimant, Mr Hugo and/or Ms  Hugo have in fact suffered pecuniary damage as a result of the  publication and such material as there is would indicate that any losses  have other causes.   iv. There is no material from which to draw the conclusion that the words  were intended to cause pecuniary damage to the Claimant, Mr Hugo  and/or Ms Hugo.   c. Defamation claim by Mr Hugo :  i. As 74(a)(i), (ii) and (iii) for the Claimant.   d. Malicious falsehood claim by Mr Hugo :  i. As 74(b)(i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) for the Claimant.   e. Defamation claim by Mrs Hugo :  i. As 74(a)(i), (ii) and (iii) for the Claimant.   f. Malicious falsehood claim by Ms Hugo :  i. As 74(b)(i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) for the Claimant.   75. It follows that the only case that I consider to be arguable is that on behalf of Mr and  Ms Hugo in respect of review (3). I consider the threshold  requirements for a Norwich   Pharmacal  order to be made out  in respect of a prospective claim brought by Mr and/or  Ms Hugo ar ising fr om the contents of that review.   76. I therefore turn to consider whether on the facts of the case, the interest of Mr and Ms  Hugo in obtaining  an order that  might enable them to vindicate their rights in respect   of their arguable  claim is outweighed by the interest of the target. I bea r in mind the  words of Nicklin J in paragraph 41 of his judgement in Davidoff  cited above, and in  particular the need to ensure that, in the context of revealing the identity of those who  make comments anonymously, the Court should be careful to ensure that any order it  makes has the purpose of vindicat ing a right to seek legitimate redress for the wrong  suffered  rather than some other motive such as seeking revenge.  High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  34 77. I am troubled here by the manner in which the Claimant  and Mr and M s Hugo  have  gone about  this litigation  for several reasons:   a. Their approach to the identity  of the correct claimant has been casual. Whilst  I  appreciate  that the distinction  between the claim being brought by the company  or by Mr and Mrs Hugo as individuals  is a relatively nuanced argument that  may no t be obvious  to non -lawyers, the Claimant appears to be a sophisticated   company  which, for example, copies in  (or purports  to copy in) its lega l team  to  correspondence  through the use of an email address, legal@govdata.co.uk  and  which firmly asserts its  legal  position.  As I have indicated, in correspondence,  it has shown an ability to assert its purported legal rights in firm terms.   b. The Claimant’s scatter  gun tactic in respect of causes of action is inappropriate .  It has alleged a variety of claims  without any explanation  of the basis of the  claims.  The majority appear to be simply unarguable , either on the grounds that  the legal elements cannot be made out or that the material relied on in support  of the claims does not bear the meaning  for which the Claimant contends.  This  is concerning  conduct for a company and its senior management when they are  required to show that their actions are simply an attempt to vi ndicate a legitimate  complaint.   c. The Claimant’s approach to those critical  of it can be noted in the documents  referred to above and relied on by the Defendant in support of the argument that  the cause of any reputational  problems that the  Claimant may have is likely to  lie other  than with the material published on the Defendant’s website.  One might  consider that the email fr om Mr Hugo  dated 12 April 2021 provide s some  support for the criticism that the anonymous reviewers have made of the  Claimant company and its management. More importantly, it shows that Mr  Hugo is willing to act aggressive ly in  correspondence in a way that suggests  that his aim might be to exact revenge rather than to vindicate his rights.   78. Taken together these matters cause me concern  that the Claimant and Mr and Ms Hugo  are conducting  this litigation  not with a view to seeking redress for genuine interference  with their rights but rather with a view to closing down any and all criticism of their  business.  High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  35 79. I balance against this the interests of the reviewer. Given the absence of any evidence  that reviewers have acted in concert , the author of review 3 must be taken for present  purposes to have acted alone. I have rejected the suggestion that this is a fake review in  the sense that it was not authored by someone who had worked for the Claimant.  Though strongly worded, the review purports to reflet the opinion of the author.  There  is no reason to think that the author is trying to use the anonymity that the we bsite  affords to cause harm to the Claimant (or Mr and Mrs Hugo) rather than to express an  opinion.  Doubtless that person believed that they would remain anonymous. The person  would not expect to be the victim of litigation brought by the Claimant or Mr and Ms  Hugo, still less to be the subject of vitriolic  communication  of the kind in which Mr  Hugo has engaged before . Further, even accepting the presumption in favour of loss  caused by a malicious false or defamatory statement, the evidence points to other causes  for loss. If this were proved to be a defamatory statement , the loss that flowed fr om it  must  be minimal , in the light of other mater ial before the court that is critical of the  Claimant or its management .   80. Weighing these factors, the balance comes down firmly against granting relief. Whilst  I accept that there may  be stronger arguments for protecting anonymity in cases  involving the expression of deeply held political or religious beliefs, there is a public  interest generally in those who post anonymous comments having their anonymity  respected as  Nicklin J made clear in Davidoff . The harm to the interest of the author  losing anonym ity is greater than the harm to Mr and Ms Hugo being prevented fr om  pursuing a claim which, if successful, is likely to be of minimal value and which could  only go a small way to vindicating the rights that they consider to have been infringed  by people posting on the Defendant’s platform.   CONCLUSION   81. It follows from the above that  amendment to the Claim Form to permit the addition of  Mr and M s Hugo as claimants would be pointless because I would in any event refuse  the relief sought . I therefore refuse the application to amend. I refuse the Claimant’s  own application for relief for reasons identified above.   82. For the sake of clarity, had I been persuaded that Mr and Ms Hugo would have been  entitled to relief if joined as claimants, I would have granted that application since  the  Claimant made clear from an early stage in the litigation that it was seeking this High Court  Approved Judgment   GovData v Indeed  UK  36 amendment and  the prejudice to them from being refused relief that they would  otherwise have been entitled to outweighs any prejudice to the Defendant from  permitting the amendment . 