Neutral Citation Number: [2024] EWCA Civ 1095  
 
Case No s: CA-2023 -001940, CA -2023 -001941,  
CA-2023 -001944, CA -2023 -001946,  
CA-2023 -001953  
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL ( CIVIL  DIVISION)  
ON APPEAL FROM THE INVESTIGATORY POWERS TRIBUNAL  
EDIS LJ, LADY CARMICHAEL, STEVEN SHAW KC  
[2023] UKIP  Trib 3  
Royal Courts of Justice  
Strand, London, WC2A 2LL  
 
Date: 20/09/2024  
Before :  
 
LORD JUSTICE HOLROYDE  
LORD JUSTICE DINGEMANS  
and 
LADY JUSTICE ELISABETH LAING  
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Between :  
 
 (1) Connor Palmer and Anor  
(2) Kulvir Singh Shergill  
(3) Usman Butt  
(4) Nasar Ahmed  
(5) ABC  and Others   Appellant s 
 - and -  
 National Crime Agency  Respondent  
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Matthew Ryder KC and Daniel Cashman  (instructed by Bindmans LLP ) for the First 
Appellant  
Thomas Schofield  (instructed by Novate Direct Legal ) for the Second Appellant  
Simon Csoka KC and Oliver Cook  (instructed by Eldwick Law ) for the Third  & Fourth 
Appellants   
Abbas Lakha KC  and Aneurin Brewer  (instructed by Avisons Solicitor s) for the Fifth 
Appellant  
David Perry KC, Richard O’Brien KC, Victoria Ailes and Andrew Deakin  (instructed by  
NCA Legal ) for the Respondent  
 
Hearing date : 16 July 2024  
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Approved Judgment

This judgment was handed down remotely at 14.00 hrs on 20. 9.24 by circulation to the 
parties or their representatives by e -mail and by release to the National Archives.  
 
.............................

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 Lord Justice Holroyde, Lord Justice Dingemans and L ady Justice Elisabeth Laing : 
Introduction  
1. This is our judgment after an oral hearing of applications for permission to appeal from 
a decision of the Investigatory Powers Tribunal (‘the IPT’) in 11 linked proposed 
appeals. The National Crime Agency (‘the NCA’) is the respondent to the proposed 
appeals. The decision of the IPT concerned the application of the regime in the 
Investigatory Powers Act  2016  (‘the IPA’) to Operation Venetic. Operation Venetic was 
the NCA’s response to EncroChat devices, which were  telephone handsets which could  
be used to get access to EncroChat, an encrypted service which was either wholly, or 
very nearly wholly, used by criminals for criminal purposes. Users were given a 
randomly generated user name which d id not identify them so that particular devices 
could not  be attributed to a specific user. The NCA was not, therefore, able to attribute 
all EncroChat usernames to specific criminal targets, although it could identify some. It 
was estimated that there were about 9000 users in the United Kingdom.  
2. The ‘appellants’ are applicants for permission to appeal, but for convenience we will 
refer to them in this judgment as ‘appellants’. The First Appellant was represented by 
Matthew Ryder KC and Daniel Cashman, the Secon d Appellant by Thomas Schofield, 
the Third and Fourth Appellants by Simon Csoka KC and Oliver Cook, and the Fifth 
Appellant by Abbas Lakha KC and Aneurin Brewer. David Perry KC, Richard O’Brien 
KC, Victoria Ailes and Andrew Deakin represented the Respondent . All appellants 
relied on the same six grounds of appeal.   
3. Section 67A(1) of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (‘RIPA’) gives a 
right of appeal on a point of law from certain determinations of the IPT to this court. 
The leave of the IPT or of this court is required (section 67A(6)(b)). The IPT and this 
court must not give leave unless it considers that the appeal would ‘raise an important 
point of principle or practice or there is another compelling reason for giving leave ’ 
(section 67A(7)).   
4. At the start of the hearing, counsel were asked whether there should be any anonymity 
orders in this court. Counsel’s general position, we were told, was that they did not 
have positive submissions to make about anonymity orders. That general position was 
subject to a potential exception in the case of the appellants represented by Mr Lakha 
KC. He was unable, however, to make detailed submissions about this at the hearing. 
We consider that, since no positive argument about prejudice was advanced in relation 
to the other appellants, they should not be the subject of anony mity orders. We invite 
further written submissions on this point from Mr Lakha, if he has any to make, in 
response to the circulation of this judgment in draft.   Following the circulation of the 
draft judgment an application for the continued anonymisation of three applicants was 
made, and we have made an order preserving their anonymity until the conclusion of 
their Crown Court proceedings.  
5. For the reasons given in this judgment, we have decided to  refuse permission to appeal.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 The facts  
6. EncroChat was an encrypted communications platform. A joint investigative team of 
French and Dutch law enforcement agencies (‘the JIT’) intercepted communications 
sent by EncroChat. The National Crime Agency  (‘the NCA’)  learned that the French 
authorities could intercept EncroChat messages. The NCA wanted to see those 
communications. A Judicial Commissioner approved a targeted equipment interference 
warrant (‘TEI 1’) under Part 5 of the IPA. The Crown Prosecution Service (‘the CPS’) 
served a European Investigation Order (‘EIO’) on the French authorities asking for the 
product of the interceptions of EncroChat. The NCA sought the revocation of TE I 1 
because the explanations it gave were not full enough. A second Judicial Commissioner 
then approved  a second targeted equipment interference warrant ( ‘TEI 2 ’). The 
proceedings in the IPT concerned TEI  2. 
7. The IPT heard evidence from three current or former officers of the NCA : Wayne 
Jones, Luke Shrimpton and Emma Sweeting . It summarised their evidence about 
communications between the French authorities and the NCA in paragraphs 27 -64. It 
carefully analysed that evidence, testing it by reference to the claimants’ submissions 
that the NCA had not been candid with the Judicial Commissioner about their ignorance 
of the method of interception and that had the NCA been candid with the Judicial 
Commissioner, it would have been obvious that a bulk interception warrant was 
necessary. The IPT acknowledged that the NCA had a preference for the material to be 
admissible in criminal proceedings but that they had not closed their minds before a 
critical Europol meeting. The IPT accepted the ‘core’ of Ms Sweeting’s account. She 
did not ask for formal confirmation because she knew she would not get it. That was 
not because she feared that the NCA would get an answer it did not want, but because 
she genuinely thought that the French authorities were reluctant to tell the NCA about 
the methods they intended to use to intercept the EncroChat messages. The relevant 
French official, Mr Decou, had confirmed the method as described in the application 
for the TEI warrant (paragraph 74).  
8. The conduct described in TEI  2 involved two stages, which reflected Ms Sweeting’s 
understanding of the way in which the implant worked. The first stage was ‘Historical 
Data Collection’. The ‘implant’ would collect data stored on a device and transmit it to 
the French authorities. It would stay in the device for stage two, ‘Forward Facing 
Collection’, in which communications stored on the devices would be collected 
throughout stage two. They would only be collected once they were stored on the 
device. That meant, in the NCA’s view, that this interception could be authorised by a 
TEI. The IPT held that the purpose of the warrant was to make the conduct of the JIT 
lawful, when it otherwise might have been an offence under the Computer Misuse Act  
1990 , which the NCA would commit as a secondary party by encouraging it. This 
enabled the NCA to ask the JIT for the material, which the JIT was going to acquire in 
any event. The Judicial Commissioner was not being asked to authorise anything apart 
from that.  
9. As the IPT observed, the necessity and proportionality of getting the data were shown 
‘to a high degree’ by the application for TEI  2. Even i f, therefore, the Judicial 
Commissioner had had doubts about the method used for getting the data, he would 
‘inevitably’ have granted the warrant. Any doubts about the later admissibility of the 
material ‘would be for the criminal courts to resolve in due course’.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 10. The Crown relied on the material gleaned from EncroChat in a number of prosecutions  
which led to trials . Several defendants in those trials challenged the admissibility of that 
material , on grounds which included an ar gument that the material  had been intercepted 
in the course of transmission and was inadmissible under section 56 of the IPA. Those 
proceedings led to two decisions of the Criminal Division of this court  (‘the CACD’),  
including  R v A, B, D and C  [2021] EWCA (Crim) 128 , reported as  R v A and others  
[2021] QB 791 (‘ A’). As Mr Ryder reminded us, an issue which could not be challenged 
in the criminal trials was whether or not the warrant was lawful. The starting point for 
the trials and for any appeals from them was that the warrant was lawful. All attempts 
in criminal trials to exclude EncroChat material have so far failed. If the appellants’ 
proposed appeal s succeed  and if the TEI  is quashed, it seems likely that there will be 
applications in the Crown  Court under section 59 of the Criminal Justice and Procedure 
Act 2001. For the purposes of these applications  for permission to appeal , and i n order 
to shorten this judgment, we, like the IPT, have assumed that we are not bound by the 
decision or reasoning in A. It is, nevertheless, strongly persuasive on the relevant issues 
of statutory construction . 
The legal framework  
The Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000  
11. Section 65 RIPA creates the IPT ’s jurisdiction. The IPT’s jurisdiction includes any 
proceedings not falling within section 65(2)(a) -(c) and which fall within section 65(3) 
as may be allocated to it by the Secretary of State by order (section  56(2)(d)).  Those 
proceedings include ‘proceedings relating to the taking place in any challengeable 
circumstances’ of any conduct in section 65(5). Conduct takes place in challengeable 
circumstances if it t akes place under, or required, an authorisation (or consideration of 
whether an authorisation should be sought) of the types listed in section 65(8) (section 
65(7) ). The authorisations listed in section 65(8) include warrants under Part 5 of the 
IPA.  
The Investigatory Powers Act 2016  
12. Section 1(1) of the IPA declares that it ‘sets out the extent which certain investigatory 
powers may be used to interfere with privacy’. Part 1 ‘imposes certain duties in relation 
to privacy and contains other protections for privacy’  (section 1(2)).  Section 2 enacts 
various ‘general duties in relation to privacy’. Part 1 is headed  ‘General Privacy 
Protections’. Part 2 is headed ‘Lawful interception of communications’. Chapter 1 of 
Part 2 provides for  ‘Interception and Examination with a Warrant’, Chapter 2 for ‘Other 
forms of lawful interception’ and Chapter 3 for ‘Restrictions on use of disclosure of 
material obtained under warrants etc’. Part 5 is headed  ‘Equipment Interference’ and 
Part 6  ‘Bulk Warrants’. Subject to immaterial exceptions, the IPA extends to England 
and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland (section 272(4)).  
13. Sections 3 -10 are headed ‘Prohibitions against unlawful interception’. The interception 
of communications in the United Kingdom is a criminal offence unless a person has 
lawful authority to do it (section 3(1) of the IPA).  Section 3(3) introduces sections 4 and 
5, which, respectively, make provision about the meaning of ‘interception’ and when 
interception is ‘regarded as carried out in the United Kingdom’. Section 3(4) introduces 
section 6 which contains provisions about when a person has lawful authority to carry 
out an interception.  Section 3 is bolstered by section 7, which gives the Investigatory

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 Powers Commissioner (‘the Commissioner’) power to serve a monetary penalty notice, 
if, among other things, a person has intercepted, in the United Kingdom, any 
communication in the course of its transmission by a public telecommunications 
system, without lawful authority, and without making any attempt to act in accordance 
with an interception warrant, but has not, in the opinion of the Commissioner, 
committed an offence under section 3(1)  (section 7(3)) . Section 8(1) imposes civil 
liability for certain interceptions carried out in the United Kingdom.  
14. Section 4 defines ‘interception’. It is divided into two groups of subsections. The first 
concerns ‘Interception in relation to telecommunications systems’ (section 4(1) -(6)). 
The second concerns ‘Interception carried out in the United Kingdom’ (section 4(8)). 
Section 4(1) makes clear that the definition of interception applies for ‘the purposes of 
this Act’, and that it is an exhaustive definition. A person intercepts a communication in 
the course of its transmission by means of a telecommunications system if that person 
does a ‘relevant act’ in relation to the system, the effect of which is to make any content 
of the communication available to a person who is not the sender or its intended 
recipient. ‘Content’ is defined in section 261(6).  
15. A ‘relevant act’ i n relation to a telecommunications system means modifying, or 
interfering with the system or its operation, monitoring transmissions made by means of 
the system, and monitoring transmissions made by wireless telegraphy to or from 
apparatus that is part of the system (section 4(2)). ‘Modifying a telecommunications 
system’ includes to attaching any apparatus to, or otherwise modifying or interfering 
with any part of the system, or any wireless telegraphy apparatus used for making 
transmissions to or from apparatus that is part of system  (section 4(3) ). ‘The relevant 
time’, in relation to a communication transmitted by a telecommunications system 
means any time while the communication is being transmitted, and any time when the 
communication is stored in or by the system (whether before o r after its transmission)  
(section 4(4) ). If the content of a communication is diverted or recorded at the relevant 
time, so as to be available to a person after the relevant time, it is to be treated as having 
been made available to that person at the relevant time (section 4(5)).  
16. ‘Wireless telegraphy’ and ‘wireless telegraphy apparatus’ have the same meanings as in 
sections 116 and 117 of the Wireless Telegraphy Act 2006 . So far as relevant, ‘wireless 
telegraphy’ means the emitting or receiving, over paths that are not provided by any 
material substance constructed or arranged for that purpose, electromagnetic energy of 
a frequency no greater than 3000 gigahertz which ‘serves for conveying messages, 
sound or visual images (whether or not those are received by anyone) or for operating 
or controlling machinery or apparatus ’. ‘Wireless telegraphy apparatus’ means 
apparatus for the emitting or receiving, over paths that are not provided by any material 
substance constructed or arranged for the purpose, of the energy described in the 
second sentence of this paragraph.  
17. For the purposes of the IPA, the interception of a communication is carried out in the 
United Kingdom ‘if and only if’ , among other things,  the relevant act is carried out by 
conduct ‘within the United Kingdom’ (section 4(8)).   
18. The parties agreed in the IPT that the acquisition of the EncroChat data was an 
‘interception’ as defined in section 4 of the IPA.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 19. Section 6 defines ‘lawful authority’. Section 6(1) de fines th ree situations in which a 
person has lawful authority for an interception  (in section 6(1)(a), (b) and (c)) . The first 
such situation is if the interception is done in accordance with a targeted interception 
warrant (‘a TI’) or a mutual assistance warrant (‘an MA’) under Chapter 1 of Part 2, or 
a bulk interception warrant under Chapter 1 of Part 6  (section 6(1)(a)) . The  third such 
situation i nclude s, in the case of information stored in or by a telecommunications 
system, that the interception is done in accordance with a T EI under Part 5 or an MA, 
or a bulk equipment interference warrant under Chapter 1 of Part 6  (section 6(1)( c)(i)), 
or the interception is done in the exercise of a statutory power that is exercised for the 
purpose of obtaining information  (section 6(1)(c)(i i)). If conduct is lawful under section 
6(1)(a)  or under section 6(1(b) ), it is  ‘to be treated as lawful for all other purposes’ 
(section 6(2)).  There is no equivalent provision in relation to section 6(1)(c).  
20. Section 9 is headed ‘Restriction on requesting interception by overseas authorities’. It 
applies to a ‘request for any authorities of a country …outside the United Kingdom to 
carry out the interception of communications sent by or intended for, an individual who 
the person making the request believes will be in the British Islands at the time of the 
interception’ (section 9(1)). By subsection (2), a  request to which section 9 applies may 
not be made by or on behalf of a person in the United Kingdom unless  (a) a TI has been 
issued under Chapter 1 of Part 2 authorising the person to whom it is addressed to 
secure the interception of the communications sent by, or intended for, that individual, 
or (b) a targeted examination warrant has been issued authorising the selection of the 
contents of such communications for examination.  
21. Section 10 is headed ‘Restriction on requesting assistance under mutual assistance 
agreements etc’. At the relevant time it applied to requests ‘for assistance in accordance 
with an EU mutual assistance instrument’ and ‘an international mutual assistance 
agreement so far as the assistance is in connection with, or in the form of, the 
interception of communications’ (section 10(1) (a) and (b) ). Section 10(2) is the relevant 
restriction. A request to which section 10 applied could not be made by or on behalf of 
a person in the United Kingdom to  the competent authorities of a country outside the 
United Kingdom unless a n MA  had been issued under Chapter 1 of Part 2 authorising 
the making of the request.  
22. Section 10(2A) was inserted on 30 July 2017 by paragraph 9 of Schedule 3 to the 
Criminal Justice (European Investigation Order) Regulations 2017 SI No 730 (‘the 
Regulations’). It creates two exceptions to the restriction in section 10(2). The first 
exception is that section 10(2) does not apply in the case of a request for assistance in 
connection with, or in the form of, interception of a communication stored in or by a 
telecommunications device if the request is made in the exercise of a statutory power 
that is exercised for the purpose of obtaining information.  
23. At the relevant time, ‘EU mutual assistance instrument’ was defined in section 10(3) as 
an EU instrument relating to the provision of mutual assistance in connection with or in 
the form of, the interception of communications, which requires the issue of a warrant 
or equivalent instrument in cases in which assistance is given, and is designated as such 
in regulations made by the Secretary of State. ‘International mutual assistance 
agreement’ was and is still defined in section 10(3) as an international agree ment which 
relates to mutual assistance in connection with, or in the form of, the interception of 
communications, requires the issue of a warrant or equivalent authority in cases in

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 which assistance is given and is designated as such an agreement in regulations made 
by the Secretary of State.  
24. Section 11 creates an offence of unlawfully obtaining communications data. It is 
committed by a person who, without lawful authority, knowingly or recklessly obtains  
data from a telecommunications or postal operator.  
25. Part 2 is headed ‘Lawful interception of communications’, and Chapter 1, ‘Interception 
and examination with a warrant’. Section 15 is in Chapter 1 of Part 2. It provides for the 
warrants which may be issued under that Chapter. They are TIs, targeted examination 
warrants and MAs. Chapter 1 contains a significant number of protections in relation to 
those warrants.  
26. A TI is a warrant which authorises or requires a person ‘to secure, by any conduct 
described in the warrant ’, any one or more of three things (section 15(2) ). They are the 
interception, in the course of their transmission by a telecommunications system, of 
communications described in the warrant, the obtaining of secondary data and the 
disclosure of what is obtained under the warrant to the person to whom the warrant is 
addressed.  
27. ‘Mutual assistance warrant’ is defined in section 15(4) as a warrant which (among other 
things) authorises or requires the person to whom it is addressed to secure, by any 
conduct described in the warrant, the making of a request, in accordance with an 
international mutual assistance agreement, for the provision of any assistance of a kind 
described in the warrant in connection with, or in the form of, an interception of 
communications . ‘International mutual assistance agreement’ has the meaning given by 
section 10(3): see section 60(1).  
28. A TI and an MA also authorise the conduct described in section 15(5), in addition to the 
conduct described in the warrant. A warrant issued under Chapter 2 may relate to a 
particular person or organisation, or to a single set of premises (section 17(1)). All those 
warrants, apart from an MA, may also relate to a group of people who share a common 
purpose, or who carry on a particular activity, or to more tha n one person or 
organisation, or set of premises, where the conduct authorised by the warrant is for the 
purposes of a single investigation or operation or for testing or training activities 
(section 17(2) ). Those who can apply for a warrant under Chapter 1 are listed in section 
18(1) and include a person who is the competent authority of a country or territory 
outside the United Kingdom for the purposes of an international mutual assistance 
agreement. The formal requirements for such warrants are listed in section 31.  A 
warrant which relates to a  particular person must name that person (section 31(3)).  
29. In most circumstances, a TI and MA must be issued by the Secretary of State, subject to 
the controls in sections 19 and 20. An important further control is the requirement 
imposed by section 23 that two aspects of a decision to issue a warrant under Chapter 2 
(its necess ity and proportionality) must be reviewed, applying judicial review 
principles, by a Judicial Commissioner (see also sections 24 and 25).  A control in 
Chapter 1 is that a ‘relevant mutual assistance warrant’ may be issued by a senior 
offici al designated by the Secretary of State if the interception subject is outside the 
United Kingdom (section 40(1)(a)). If, however, the Secretary of State or a senior 
official believes that the person group or organisation named or described in the

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 warrant as the interception subject is in the United Kingdom, that person must cancel 
the warrant. Chapter 2 contains many other significant controls to protect privacy.  
30. Section 56 is headed ‘Exclusion of matters from legal proceedings’. The effect of 
section 56(1), subject to the exceptions in Schedule 3 to the IPA, is to make evidence 
which has the effects described in section 56(2) and (3) inadmissible in any legal 
proceedings. Those effects are the disclosure in any circumstances from which its 
origin in interception -related conduct may be inferred, of any content of an intercepted 
communication or any secondary data obtained from it, or of tending  to suggest that 
any interception -related conduct has or may have occurred or may be going to occur. 
‘Interception -related conduct’, a term which might be thought to have a potentially 
wide meaning, is defined in relatively narrow terms (in section 56(2)). It includes a 
breaches of sections 3, and of the prohibitions in sections 9 and 10 of the IPA. 
Paragraph 2(1) of Schedule 3 to the IPA provides that section 56(1) does not prohibit 
the disclosure of any content of a communication, or any related secondary data if the 
interception of the communication was lawful under section 6(1)(c) (among other 
provisions).  
31. Part 5 is headed ‘Equipment Interference’. Section 99 is headed ‘Warrants under this 
Part: general’. There are two types of warrant which may be issued under Part 5. One is 
a TEI (section 99(1)(a)). A TEI authorises or requires the person to whom it is 
addressed to ‘secure interference with any equipment for the purpose of obtaining’ 
communications, equipment data, and any other information (section 99(2)).  A TEI 
must also authorise or require the person to whom it is addressed to secure the 
obtaining of the matters to which the warrant relates, and may also authorise that person 
to secure ‘the disclosure, in any manner described in the warrant, of anything obtained 
under the warrant by virtue of section 99(3)(a) ’ (section 99(3)).  The obtaining of 
communications or of any other information includes doing so by monitoring etc a 
person’s communications or other activities, or by recording anything which is 
monitored etc (section 99(4)).  
32. A TEI also authorises any conduct which is necessary in order to do what is expressly 
authorised or required by the warrant, including conduct for the obtaining of 
communications, equipment data or other information, and any conduct by any person 
which is conduct in pursuance of a requirement imposed by or on behalf of the person 
to whom the warrant is addressed to be provided with assistance in giving effect to the 
warrant (section 99 (5)). It may not authorise or require, by virtue of section 99(3), 
conduct in relation to a communication other than a stored communication which 
would (unless done with lawful authority) constitute an offence under section 3(1) 
(unlawful interception) (section 99(6)). ‘Stored’ means ‘stored in or by a 
telecommunication system (whether before or after its transmission )’ (section 99(8)) . 
Any conduct carried out in accordance with a warrant under Part 5 is lawful for all 
purposes (section 99(1 1)).  
33. ‘Equipment data’ is widely defined in section 100. It includes ‘systems data’ and 
‘identifying data’ within section 100(2). ‘Systems data’ and ‘identifying data’ are 
defined in section 263. Section 101 is headed ‘Subject -matter of warrants’.  Section 
101(1) lists the eight matters, to any one or more of which a TEI may relate. One is 
‘equipment belonging to, used by or in the possession of more than one person or 
organisation, where the interference is for the purpose of a single investigation or 
operation’ : section 101(1)(c).

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 34. Section 106(1) and (3) gives various ‘law enforcement chiefs’ power to issue a TEI on 
an application made by an ‘appropriate law enforcement officer’ if the fo ur conditions 
in section 106(1) , or, as the case may be, section 106(3) , are met.  Section 107 enacts 
restrictions on the power of law enforcement chiefs to issue a TEI under section 106. 
Unless one of the exceptions specified in section 107(1) or 107(3) applies, a TEI may 
be issued whether or not the person who has power to issue the warrant considers that 
there is a ‘British Islands connection’. That phrase is defined in section 107(4).  
35. Section 108 provides for the approval by a Judicial Commissioner of warrants issued 
under Part 5 of the IPA.  Section 135 defines ‘communication’, and ‘equipment’, among 
other things.  
36. Part 6 is headed ‘Bulk Warrants’. Chapter 1 provides for bulk interception warrants , 
Chapter 2 for bulk acquisition warrants,  and Chapter 3 for bulk equipment interference 
warrants. None of these types of warrant is relevant to this case because the 
communications /information at issue in this case are not ‘overseas -related’ as defined in 
section  136(3) or section 176(2) , and see section 158(3)). Par ts 7, 7A and 7B concern 
activities of the intelligence services: respectively warrants r elating to ‘bulk personal 
datasets’  retained by the intelligence services, bulk personal dataset authorisations, and 
third party bulk personal datasets.  
37. The European Investigation Order (‘EIO’) in this case was made under the Regulations. 
The Regulations have now been repealed. When they were in force, regulation 7(1) 
provided that if it appeared to a prosecutor that an offence had been committed or that 
there were reasonable grounds for suspecting that an offence had been committed, and 
proceedings had been instituted in respect of the offence, or it was being investigated, 
the prosecutor might make an order under regulation 7. An order made under regulation 
7 was an order specifying one or more investigative measures to be carried out in a 
participating State (‘the executing State ’) for the purpose of obtaining evidence for use 
either in the investigation or the proceedings or both (regulation 7(3) ). The prosecutor 
could only make the order if it appeared to him that the ‘investigative measures to be 
specified in the order could lawfully have been ordered or undertaken under the same 
conditions in a similar domestic case’. Regulation 11(1) provided that in applying that 
test the prosecutor should consider various matters . Those included, where the 
investigative measure requested would require authorisation under an enactment before 
it could lawfully be done in the United Kingdom, whether such authorisation has been, 
or could have been, granted, taking into account various matters and the provisions of 
the enactment which apply to the granting of such an authorisation (regulation 7(3)). 
When the measure is in connection with, or in the form of, the interception of 
communications, the relevant authority must consider whether any additional 
requirements imposed by any enactment other than the Regulations have been complied 
with (regulation 7(4)).  
The relevant reasoning in A  
38. A was an appeal against a decision of Dove J, made at a preparatory hearing, that 
EncroChat material would be admissible in the criminal trials of several defendants. It 
was common ground that the EncroChat handsets were part of a telecommunications 
system. One issue on which the admissibility of the material turned was whether, at the 
time of the interception, the material was being transmitted (within the meaning of 
section 4(4)(a)) or was being stored, (within the meaning of section 4(4)(b)). Dove J

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 decided that it was being stored, and that it was therefore covered by paragraph 2(1) of 
Schedule 3, and, therefore, admissible. The CACD described that as ‘the critical issue’ 
in the appeal (paragraph 51), and as ‘the only substantial question which the judge was 
required to answer’, in paragraph 79. It upheld  Dove J on that question (see paragraphs 
51-69). The ‘harvesting’ was ‘interception’ which was made lawful by the TEI and by 
section 6(1)(c). Paragraph 2 of Schedule 3 made that product of the interception 
admissible (paragraphs 67 and 69).  
39. The CACD added that it was ‘necessary to say something about Grounds 3 and 4’ while 
acknowledging that even if section 9 or 10 had been breached, that would not affect the 
admissibility of the material. Breaches of sections 9 and 10 might give rise to 
arguments under section 78 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, although the 
CACD  observed that it would be  a ‘surprising exercise of’ of that power to exclude 
evidence which ‘Parliament has provided in clear terms should be admissible’ 
(paragraph 71).  
40. The CACD  considered Ground 3, which was based on section 10, in paragraphs 72 -75. 
It recorded Dove J’s conclusion that since the JIT was intending to go ahead with its 
plan in any event, the NCA had not made a request for any interception, but for the 
product of any such interception. The CACD  did not approve that reasoning. The EIO 
appeared to the CACD , by reference to the statutory context, to be a request for 
assistance ‘in connection with’ the interception of communications. Unless section 
10(2A) applied, it was unlawful because there was no MA (see section 15). Dove J had 
held that section 10(2A) did apply and that the relevant statutory power was that 
conferred by regulation 7 of the Regulations. The CACD noted that section 10(2A) was 
inserted in the IPA by the Regulations. It concluded that the purpose of the Regulations 
and of section 10(2A) was to ‘incorporate the EU investigation order system into 
domestic law’ (paragraph 73).  
41. It would be inconsistent with that purpose to construe section 10 ‘so narrowly’ as to 
exclude an EIO like the EIO in this case. The EIO was expressed to be ‘a request for 
assistance in connection with, or in the form of, interception of a communication stored 
in or by a telecommunications system’. Those terms had broad meanings. A request 
made in order to obtain the results of interception of communications ‘appears to us to 
be a request for assistance in connection with interception’ (paragraph 74). In just the 
same way as the prosecution could not deny that the EIO was not ‘a request for the 
purposes of section 10’ it was impossible for the defendants to contend that the EIO 
was not made ‘in the exercise of a statutory power’ for the purposes of section 10(2A), 
which was enacted precisely in order to include EIOs (paragraph 75).  
42. Ground  4 was based on section 9. The CACD considered ground 4 in paragraphs 76 -
78. There was no relevant warrant. Unlike section 10, section 9 does not refer to 
communications which are stored in or by a system. The defendants argued that activity 
which was lawful by virtue of section 6(1)(c), and by section 10(2A), was made 
unlawful by section 9.  ‘That would be an extraordinary outcome’ (paragraph 76).  
43. Dove J had held that there was no relevant request. The CACD did not consider it 
‘necessary to review’ his conclusion about the facts. Whether that was right or wrong, 
Dove J had also ruled against the defendants on the construction of section 9. He held 
that ‘on i ts proper construction, section 9… applies to requests for the interception of 
targeted interception material and not targeted interference material’ so that it did not

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 apply on the facts. He considered that the reference in section 9 to interception of 
communications was to the interception of communication s governed by Part 2 and by 
section 15. That was reinforce d by the reference in section 9(2) to TIs ‘under Part 2 of 
this Act’. The clear intention of section 9 was to prevent ‘the circumvention of the 
regulation of Part 2 activity by the commissioning of overseas authorities to carry it out 
on behalf of the UK authorities’.  To read section 9 as applying to conduct authorised 
by section 99 would cut across ‘the breadth’ of section 99(5) an d would require a TI in 
relation to TEI material. That would not ‘sit well’ with the legislation which clearly 
provides separat e regimes for targeted interception and TEI material.  
44. The CACD  agreed with Dove J that section 9 ‘should be construed so that it is 
restricted to prohibiting’ a request to a foreign state to carry out interception which 
would need a TI if done in the United Kingdom by the authorities in the United 
Kingdom, unless the United Kingdom authorities have a TI. Section 10 covers a request 
made under an EIO or under an international mutual assistance agreement. By 
‘necessary implication’ section 10 requires section 9 to be construed so that it ‘does not 
apply to cases within section 10’. It only governs a ‘request’ made by means other than 
an EU mutual assistance agreement or an international mutual assistance agreement 
(paragraph 78).  
“ section 9 of the 2016 Act should be construed so that it is 
restricted to prohibiting the requesting of a foreign state to 
carry out interception which would require a Part 2 targeted 
interception warrant if carried out in the United Kingdom by 
the United Kingdom authorities, unless such a warrant is in 
place.  The position which applies if the request is made under 
an EU mutual assistance instrument or an international mutual 
assistance agreement is governed by section 10 so far as the 
assistance is in connection with or in the form of the 
interception of communications.  That provision by necessary 
implication  requires  section 9 to be construed so that it does not 
apply to cases within section 10. It governs only a request made 
by means other than an EU mutual assistance instrument or an 
international mutual assistance agreement ” 
45.  The CACD did not endorse the judge’s reasoning that the NCA had not made a 
relevant “request” for the purposes of sections 9 or 10 (see paragraphs 72 and 77).  
The relevant reasoning of the IPT  
46. The issues which the IPT decided are described in paragraph 6 of its judgment. They 
included whether section 10 required the NCA to get a n MA  (and w hether the absence 
of such a warrant made the EIO unlawful ), whether section 9 required the NCA to get a 
TI, and whether the NCA was required to get a bulk equipment interference warrant .   
The IPT held that it did not have jurisdiction to decide whether or not the EIO was 
made lawfully, and that the NCA was not required to get a TI or a bulk equipment 
interference warrant.  
47. In paragraph 36 the IPT recorded the NCA’s understanding that the JIT had legal 
authority to carry out the relevant activity, and it s understanding that it needed domestic 
authority to enable it to use the data acquired by the JIT . In paragraph 77 the IPT set out

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 the material parts of the description of the conduct which was the subject of the TEI. 
The IPT then held, in paragraph 78, that ‘The purpose of the warrant was to render the 
conduct of the JIT lawful, when otherwise it might have been an offence under the 
Computer Misuse Act which the NCA might therefore commit as a secondary party by 
encouraging it. It therefore enabled the NCA to request the material from the JIT, which 
it was going to acquire in any event’. The Judicial Commissioner was being asked to 
authorise the collection and sharing of stored data from the devices. He was not being 
asked to authorise anything else.  
48.  In paragraphs 79 -82  t he IPT described the legislative provisions which were relevant 
to the arguments about  sections 9 and 10 of the IPA. The IPT set out sections 9 and 10 
of the IPA , and regulations 7 and 11 of the Regulations, commenting that the 
‘designated public prosecutor’ for the purposes of the Regulations was the Director of 
Public Prosecutions (‘the DPP’) and any Crown Prosecutor, and that regulation 59 
designated Directive 2014/41/EU regarding the European Investigation Order in 
criminal matters as an EU mutual assistance instrument for the purposes of section 10 
of the IPA. Paragraph 9 of the Regulations amended the IPA by inserting section 
10(2A).  
49. In paragraphs 83 -108 the IPT considered the arguments about section 10, under the 
heading ‘Issue (b): The tribunal’s jurisdiction in relation to the claims that the EIO was 
unlawful, and the claim that the NCA breached section 10 of the IPA’. It summarised 
the parties’ submissions in paragraphs 83 -87. 
50. It concluded that the claims were claims that the claimants’ human rights had been 
breached and that the IPT was the only appropriate tribunal to deal with those claims 
(section 65(3)(d) of RIPA). The IPT only had jurisdiction if the proceedings related to  
‘the taking place in any challengeable circumstances’ of any conduct in section 65(5). 
Conduct takes place in such circumstances if it is conduct that took place under, 
required the grant of, or at least consideration of seeking, a warrant of the types listed in 
section 65(8) (section 65(7)).  
51. The IPT stated that the claimants’ characterisation of the ‘conduct’ was not consistent : 
they accepted that the EIO had asked for help with the interception of communications ; 
but, they said, the ‘conduct’ was in ‘challengeable circumstances’ because it was done 
under the authority of a ‘purported’ warrant under Part 5 of the IPA. Those ‘competing’ 
characterisations conflated the roles of the DPP and of the NCA. The DPP made the 
request. For the purposes of section 10, the conduct was the making of the request. That 
was ‘potentially prohibited’ by section 10(2). The purpose of the EIO was to get the 
results of the interception of communications. It was a request for assistance ‘in 
connection with interception ’. This was consistent with paragraphs 72 -75 of the 
decision in A.  
52. At a late stage the NCA had argued that the NCA might not have needed a Part 5 
warrant.  If the NCA did need a Part 5 warrant, the conduct was within section 
65(5)(czm) of RIPA, because it was in connection with conduct within section 
65(5)(czd) of RIPA. The IPT did not consider that there  were  ‘challengeable 
circumstances’, however. The ‘conduct’ for this purpose was making a request for data 
obtained by the French authorities. The making of that request did not take place with 
the purported authority of a Part 5 warrant. No warrant under Part 5 was required, or

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 apt, to authorise the making of this kind of request. The existence of a TEI is not a 
lawful precondition for such a request.  
53. Regulation 11 of the Regulations did not suggest otherwise. Where an investigative 
measure, if carried out in the United Kingdom, would require authorisation under an 
enactment, the maker of the request must consider whether such authorisation has been, 
or could have been, granted. The investigative measure specified in the EIO was a 
request for access to data obtained by the French authorities in respect of the EncroChat 
devices which were in the United Kingdom. The maker of the request was not asking 
for an investigative measure to be pursued, but for the fruits of an investigation.  
54. The IPT also considered whether there were challengeable circumstances because the 
conduct needed the authority of a n MA . No MA was required. The IPT agreed with the 
reasoning in A on this point. That reasoning was not binding but was ‘highly 
persuasive’.  
55. The reasoning in A was that the EIO was a request for assistance under an EU mutual 
assistance instrument in connection with the interception of communications. Section 
10(2A) applied because the request was made in the exercise of a statutory power (the 
power of a prosecutor to make or to validate an EIO under regulation 7 of the 
Regulations). The purpose of the regulations and of section 10(2A) was ‘to incorporate 
the EIO system into domestic law’. It was inconsistent with that purpose to construe 
section 10(1) and (2A) so as to remove an EIO from their scope. The CACD  rejected 
the argument that a mutual assistance warrant was  necessary  for a lawful request for 
assistance in connection with the interception of communications.  
56. If, therefore, the IPT had had jurisdiction, it would have rejected that challenge for the 
same reasons as were given in A. 
57. The next issue which the IPT considered was whether a TI or a targeted examination 
warrant under section 15 was required. The claimants submitted that section 9 was 
engaged on the facts. It was argued that the NCA and the Judicial Commissioner had 
erred in law by relying on a Part 5 warrant. Section 9 does not distinguish between live 
and stored communications because foreign authorities would not be prepared to 
disclose their methods. A TI  covered both interception in the course of transmission and 
the interception of stored material.  
58. The IPT again agreed with the reasoning of the CACD  in A (in paragraphs 76 -79 of A). 
The IPT held that section 9 applies to requests for the interception of targeted 
interception material and did not apply here. The intention of section 9 was to stop the 
authorities in the United Kingdom from evading the regulation of activity within Part 2 
by commissioning overseas authorities to do it in the United Kingdom on their behalf, 
and it should be construed accordingly. Section 10 governed requests made under an 
EU mutual assistance instrument (or under an international mutual assistance 
agreement) if the assistance was in connection with or in the form of the interception of 
communications. By necessary implication, section 9 did not apply to situations 
covered by section 10. Section 9 only applied to requests other than by means of an EU 
mutual assistance instrument or an international mutual assistance agreement.  The IPT 
considered that section 6(1)(c) and section 10(2A) made the conduct lawful.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 59. The IPT made a number of further observations which it considered supported the 
CACD’s  construction of sections 9 and 10 in A. The IPT noted that s ection  9 requires a 
TI. TI material is inadmissible (section 56 and paragraph 2 of Schedule 3). The IPT 
considered  that it was difficult to see why Parliament would have chosen to make all 
material which came from requests to foreign authorities inadmissible. That was the 
consequence of the claimants’ construction of section 9. That approach even applied to 
stored material. The refusal to admit material obtained by interception in the course of 
transmission was a policy choice to preserve the value of the use of that technique for 
intelligence purposes. It has nothing to do with fairness or Convention rights. It is not 
designed to protect the individual, but coincidentally gives ‘a windfall benefit to 
defendants against whom the Crown cannot use evidence secured by those means’. 
There was no obvious reason why that windfall should also apply where the material 
was stored material, ‘simply because a foreign agency, rather than a domestic one, had 
intercepted the material’.  
60. The IPT then considered whether a bulk interference warrant was required. It was 
common ground that such a warrant could not have been granted to the NCA. The 
evidence did not entirely support the contention of exclusive criminal use. 294 out of 
7407 phones which had been examined had not ‘demonstrated a clear link to 
criminality’. 173 of those had no content, and the others held ‘limited data’. The NCA 
relied on section 101(1)(c) of the IPA.  
61. The IPT rejected the claimants’ submissions. It was satisfied that the aim of Operation 
Venetic was ‘to obtain material from one source , namely the EncroChat system. It was 
material about a large group of people, who were all users of the system. The NCA’s 
approach was based on its assessment that the use of EncroChat was exclusively for 
criminal purposes ’. Section 101(1)(c) was widely drawn. That width did not support the 
supposed limitations on which the claimants’ arguments rested. There was no error of 
law in characterising the investigation as an investigation into the criminal use of 
technology. The IPT referred to paragraph 120 of A. This supported the view which the 
IPT had independently reached.  
62. The claimants’ argument could only succeed if they could undermine the NCA’s 
assessment (when the NCA applied for the warrant) about the criminal use of 
EncroChat. No material provided to the IPT had that effect. The assessment dated from 
2019 (that is, the 2019 strategic assessment which was referred to in the warrant). The 
assessment was not create d for the purposes of the application. The material which ha d 
emerged more recently was irrelevant  to the IPT’s assessment. In any event, that 
material did not show non -criminal use of the system. It showed ‘very extensive 
use…for criminal purposes’. There were a few cases in which there was not enough 
information to tell for what purpose the handset had been used.  
63. The IPT also rejected the claimants’ argument that the NCA had breached its duty of 
candour about collateral intrusion. The application for the warrant was not misleading.  
The IPT’s reasons for refusing permission to appeal  
64. It is only necessary to refer to paragraphs 8 and 9 of the IPT’s reasons for refusing 
permission to appeal. The IPT said that it had held that the purpose of the TEI was as 
described in paragraph 78 of the judgment (see paragraph 47, above). That was not an 
improper purpose. Whether or not the NCA’s analysis of that issue, when it applied for

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 the warrant, was flawed, that was not an improper purpose. If, as the NCA had 
submitted, at a late stage in the hearing, a TEI was, in any event, unnecessary, it did not 
matter whether the purpose was a proper purpose or not.  
The grounds of appeal  
65. There are six grounds of appeal  which raise six broad i ssues . 
1. Did section 9 require the NCA to get a TI? 
2. Was the TEI obtained under Part 5 of the IPA obtained for an improper 
purpose ? 
3. Did the IPT err in law in holding that it had no jurisdiction to consider 
whether the NCA had breached section 10 of the Act by not having a 
mutual legal assistance warrant, and that no such warrant was needed ? 
4. Was Operation Venetic a ‘single investigation’ for the purposes of section 
101(1)(c) of the IPA?  
5. Did the IPT bl ur the distinction between thematic and bulk interception 
warrants in a way which interfere d with the appellants’ article 8 rights ? 
6. Did the IPT err in holding that EncroChat was used exclusively, or very 
nearly exclusively, for criminal purposes ? 
The submissions  
66. Mr Ryder  KC put his submissions on ground 1 under three headings. First, the 
circumstances were clearly within section 9 on straightforward reading; second , the IPT 
misread section 9, and third, A is not binding. As the IPT did not hold that it was bound 
by A, and we have assumed, for the purposes of these applications, that we are not, we 
say nothing further about the third heading.  
67. Mr Ryder relied on the definitions of ‘interception’ and of ‘lawful authority’ in section 
4 and section 6, respectively. A TEI can only be used to intercept stored 
communications, whereas a TI applies both to live and to stored communications. The 
NCA was requiring or requesting the French authorities to intercept communications. 
Section 9 made it clear that a TI was necessary  in this case . Section 9(1) did not have a 
‘carve out’ for stored data. Had the NCA asked which warrant was appropriate, the only 
answer was a TI. The IPT’s purposive interpretation of section 9 (see paragraph 58, 
above) did not explain which warrant was necessary.  
68. The IPT’s ‘windfall’ argument was wrong. The decision to mandate a TI was a policy 
decision by Parliament. Unless the appellants’ construction was linguistically 
impossible, this court should give effect to the plain language of section 9. Foreign 
states did not distinguish between the interception of live and stored communications 
because they did not want to disclose their methods. It was not surprising that 
Parliament had taken a strict approach to the interception by a foreign state of 
communications to and from a person in the United Kingdom. The question for the IPT 
was which was the right warrant; and the answer was given by section 9.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 69. The IPT did not address the question whether the TEI had a lawful purpose, but did 
address the question in its reasons for refusing permission to appeal. The purpose of the 
TEI was to make the conduct of the JIT lawful; and that was not a proper purpose. A 
TEI can only be issued for a statutory purpose, that is, to authorise the conduct 
described in the TEI.  
70. Mr Ryder’s main argument about section 10 was that the approach of the IPT was 
circular. If the EI O is the ‘statutory power’ referred to in section 10(2A)(a), the 
exception created by section 10 (2A)(a) is redundant, because the necessary statutory 
power is always present.   
71. On grounds 4 and 5, Mr Lakha KC argued that the IPT’s interpretation of section 
101(1)(c) drove a coach and horses through the distinction between a TEI and a bulk 
interference warrant. The ‘criminal use of technology’ is not a defined subject. The 
IPT’s approach meant that a TEI could be used for any platform, such as WhatsApp. It 
was inconsistent with an opinion of Lord Anderson KC, with paragraph 298 of the 
Explanatory Notes for the Bill which became the IPA, and with the Code of Practice. 
The conduct described in the application for the TEI could not reasonably be described 
as being ‘for the purpose of a single investigation or operation’. The blurring of that 
important distinction was a breach of the appellants’ article 8 rights. The consequent 
interference with their article 8 rights was not ‘in accordance with the law’, and entirely 
arbitrary.  
72. Mr Csoka KC argued, on ground 6, that the IPT had referred, in paragraph 110, to a 
confidential version of the NCA’s ‘National Strategic Assessment of Serious and 
Organised Crime ’ for 2019. This had been provided after Mr Johns had given evidence. 
The IPT’s assumption that this was not created for the purposes of the application for 
the TEI was ‘contrary to reason’. The NCA had intended to use its own implant at one 
stage .  The factual basis of the IPT’s assessment in paragraph 136 was no more than an 
assumption. The right to a fair trial (article 6) was engaged. The IPT’s finding in 
paragraph 136 was made without any adversarial process.  
Discussion  
General remarks  
73. We assume for the purposes of this judgment that there was a relevant ‘request’ ; that, 
for the purposes of the definition in section 4 of the IPA , as the parties agreed in A and 
in the IPT in this case, the JIT were engaged in the interception of communications ; and 
that the IPT had jurisdiction to consider the Appellants’ complaints . 
74. The IPA is a detailed framework. Its evident purpose is to protect privacy, while at the 
same time ensuring that those who apply for, issue, and approve warrants are governed 
by  coherent and comprehensible rules which will enable them, sometimes in urgent 
circumstances, to ensure that any criminal liability, unlawful acts, exposure to civil 
liability, or to the payment of penalty  are not incurred.  It is unlikely, in that context, that 
there is any significant overlap between the cases covered by the restrictions in sections 
9 and 10, as that is a n obvious  potential source of difficulty for all those bodies.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 75. The exact words of these two provisions must be construed against the background of 
the more detailed provisions about TIs, MAs, and TEIs, to which sections 9 and 10 
refer.  
76. Section 9 prohibits a narrow class of request s to foreign authorities to intercept 
communications sent to or by an individual who is believed to be in the United 
Kingdom. Its obvious purpose is to bolster the prohibition created by the section 3 
offence, by ensuring that the requests to which it applies cannot be made without the 
authority of a TI. It applies only to a request to intercept communications ‘sent by, or 
intended for, an individual’ who is believed to be in the United Kingdom at the relevant 
time. No such request may be made unless a TI has been issued which authorises the 
interception of communications ‘sent by , or intended for, that individual’.  
77. There are two significant and independent points about the provisions governing TIs 
which help with the construction of section 9.  
78. A TI authorises the interception of communications in the course of their transmission. 
There is no reference in section 15 to material which is stored in a system.  
79. A TI may authorise the interception of communications relating to a particular person 
or organisation, or to a group. If the TI is aimed at an individual, that individual must be 
name d in the TI.  
80. Those points show that section 9 is directed at the interception, during their 
transmission, of communications sent by or intended for a individual whose name is 
known to the authorities. In other words, section 9 does not address communications 
relating to an unidentified or unidentifiable person, or people. Nor does it address 
requests which relate to material stored in a system. We agree that ‘interception’ must 
be interpreted consistently throughout the IPA. The point here is that the coverage of 
section 9 is confined, not by that general definition, but by the need to interpret section 
9 consistently with the provisions governing T Is.  
81. Section 10 addresses a different situation from section 9. It applies to requests for help 
from foreign authorities. It applies to a potentially wider class of requests than section 9 
does, because, for example, it is not limited to requests concerning an individual who is 
believed to be in the United Kingdom . The general rule is that such requests cannot be 
made without an MA. If, however, the request is ‘in connection with, or in the form of, 
a request for the interception of communications ’, and it relates to the interception of a 
communication which is stored in or by a telecommunications system, then such a 
request may be made if the conditions in section 10(2A) are met. The request in this 
case, if it is assumed that such a request was made, was not a request to which section 9 
could  apply, for the reasons given in paragraphs 78 and 79, above. It was however, a 
request to which section 10 (1) and 10(2), but also, the exception in section 10(2A), 
could apply.  
Grounds 1 -3 
82. An important issue raised by grounds 1 and 3 is whether the conduct of the NCA in this 
case infringed one or other of the restrictions imposed by sections 9 and 10, 
respectively. Mr Ryder argue d that section 9 and section 10 cover the same field, and 
that whether or not the requirements of section 10 are met, the NCA must still comply

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 with section 9, which is not expressly limited to the interception of live 
communications. The consequence of his interpretation would be that whether or not 
section 10 is satisfied, section 9 would still require a TI on these facts.  
83. The word ‘intercept’ is defined in section 4  as including the ‘interception’ of stored 
material (see section 4(1) read with section 4(4)(b)). Mr Ryder further argue d that t here 
is nothing in the express language of section 9 which excludes stored material from the 
ambit of ‘interception’ in section 9(1). On its face, therefore, section 9 is not limited to  
the interception of live communications. It also applies to the interception of stored 
communications.   
84. In A, the CACD  relied on the reasoning of the judge in that case for the conclusion that 
section 9 applies to ‘requests for the interception of targeted interception material and 
not targeted equipment interference material, and it is therefore of no application in the 
present circumstances’. It added that section 9 should only be read as applying to a 
request to a foreign state to intercept communications where  that interception would 
need a TI if done in the United Kingdom.  
85. We accept the respondent’s submission that Mr Ryder’s arguments under ground 1 are 
fundamentally inconsistent with the decision of the CACD  in A.  As we have indicated, 
we are prepared to assume for present purposes , without deciding,  that that decision is 
not binding on the civil division of this court. Nevertheless, it is a recent decision of the 
CACD and di rectly on point, and therefore strongly persuasive.  Whether or not we are 
bound by that decision, we accept it is correct; and we agree with the IPT  that its  
further observation (noted in paragraph 34 above)  provides additional support for the 
construction which the CACD gave to  sections 9 and 10.  We see no arguable basis on 
which the reasoning in A can be rejected, distinguished or sidestepped as Mr Ryder 
invites us to do.   We also consider that the further points which we have made in the 
first section of this part of our judgment provide further support, if that is needed, for 
the reasoning and conclusions of the IPT  and of  the CACD in relation to this ground of 
appeal.  
86. It follows that the IPT w as not, even arguably, wrong to decide that section  9  should be 
construed in the way indicated by the CACD  in A.  Ground 1 therefore raises no 
arguable point of law.  Nor does it raise any important point of principle or practice 
about whether one division of this court is bound by a decision of the other division, 
because we have assumed that we are not bound by the decision in A.  
87. We turn to the arguments on section 10. We do not accept that Mr Ryder’s main point is 
arguable, for two reasons. First, the restriction in section 10(2) applies, by virtue of 
section 10(1) , both to requests under an EU mutual assistance instrument and to 
requests made under other international mutual assistance agreements. In the case of the 
former the nature of the request is not limited. In the case of the latter, the request i s 
limited to a request ‘in  so far as the assistance is in connection with or in the form of, a 
request for the interception of communications ’. The exception in section 10(2A), by 
contrast, only app lies to requests made in the exercise of a relevant statutory power, or 
in accordance with a relevant court order, and which are made in relation to a stored 
communications. It is, therefore, a specific and limited exception to the general 
restriction enacted by section 10( 2). We note the echo, in the language of section 
10(2A)(a), of the words of section 6(1)(c)(ii).  We accept that section 10(2A) was 
inserted to deal with EI Os. Those  factors mean, however, that that exception is not

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  CP & Ors v NCA  
 
 always met by all EI Os. An EI O in relation to the interception of live communications 
will never fall within the exception, and there may be other requests for international 
mutual assistance which are made in the exercise of a statutory power, or in accordance 
with a court order. The contrary is not arguable.  
88. We do not consider that there is any arguable error of law in the IPT’s implicit approach 
to the question whether the TEI was obtained for an improper purpose. As the IPT 
observed, it may be that no TEI was required at all (a late argument relied on by the 
NCA on which the IPT did not find it necessary to rule). But we do not consider that it 
is arguable, either that, if the NCA was wrong in supposing that a TEI was required, it 
applied for the TEI for an improper purpose, or that if it was right to think that a TEI 
was required, the NCA had an improper purpose in seeking the authority of a warrant 
for the conduct described in the application for the warrant. A recurrent theme of the 
IPA is that the relevant authorities must apply for the warrant which will make their 
proposed activity lawful, but also that they must conscientiously consider, in relation to 
interception and related matters, whether  any, and if so what, warrant may be necessary , 
as section 7(3)(c) shows.  
89. For those reasons, grounds 1 -3 do not raise an arguable point of law. Nor do we  
consider that the test in section 67A (7) of RIPA is met (see paragraph 3, above).  
Grounds 4 -6 
90. The IPT had evidence, which it was entitled to accept, that the NCA’s contemporaneous 
assessment was that EncroChat was exclusively, or almost exclusively, used for 
criminal purposes. There was, as we understand it, no evidence to suggest that it was 
not. There were a few cases in which there was not enough evidence to show what use 
was being made of the EncroChat handset in question, but no evidence of any use for 
purposes which were not criminal. The contrary is not arguable. Nor do we consider 
that it is arguable that the IPT erred in law in concluding, by applying the words of 
section 101(1)(c) to the facts which it was entitled to find, that Operation Venetic was 
‘a single operation or investigation’. It is significant not only that Operation Venetic 
was an operation or investigation in relation to EncroChat but also that its limits were 
co-terminous with the activities of the French authorities, that is, the deployment of the 
implant on 2 April 2020, and its use for the period described as ‘stage 2’ in the 
application for the TEI.  
91. For those reasons, grounds 4 -6 do not raise an arguable point of law. Nor do we 
consider that the test in section 67A(7) of RIPA is met (see paragraph 3, above).  
Conclusion  
92. For all those reasons, we refuse permission to appeal on grounds 1-6.