Neutral Citation Number: [2022] EWHC 132 (QB) 
 
Case No: QB-2020-001180  
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE  
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION  
MEDIA AND COMMUNICATIONS LIST  
 
Royal Courts of Justice  
Strand, London, WC2A 2LL  
 
Date: 27 Jan uary 202 2 
 
Before  : 
 
RICHARD SPEARMAN Q.C.  
(Sitting as a Judge of the Queens Bench Division)  
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Between :  
 
 ISMA ALI  Claimant  
 - and -  
 LUTON BOROUGH COUNCIL  Defendant  
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Tom Clarke  (instructed by  Irvings Law ) for the  Claimant  
Jack Harding  (instructed by Weightmans  LLP ) for the Defendant  
 
Hearing date s: 17 and 18 January 2022 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Draft Judgment  
 
 
 
 
Covid -19 Protocol: This judgment was handed down remotely by circulation to the parties' 
representatives by email , release to Bailii  and publication on the Courts and Tribunals 
Judiciary website .  The date  and time  for hand -down is deemed to be 10:30am on 27 January 
2022 .

2 
 Richard Spearman Q.C. : 
INTRODUCTION   
1. In this case it is not in disp ute that an employee of the Defendant, Rhully Begum , 
breached the rights of the Claimant by accessing and disclosing to the Claimant’s 
husband information about the Claimant (and also the two young children of the family) 
which was stored on the Defendant’ s IT system. The issue is whether the Defendant is 
vicariously liable for Ms Begum’s admittedly wrongful, and indeed criminal, acts.  
2. It is common ground that this issue falls to be determined by applying the law as 
declar ed by the Supreme Court in  Various Claimants v Wm Morrison Supermarkets plc  
[2020] AC 989 , and in particular the test reiterated by Lord Reed PSC at [25] : 
“… in a case concerned with vicarious liability a rising out of a 
relationship of employment, the court generally has to decide 
whether the wrongful conduct was so closely connected with 
acts the employee was authorised to do that, for the purposes of 
the liability of his employer, it may fairly and prope rly be 
regarded as done by the employee while acting in the ordinary 
course of his employment.”  
3. On behalf of the Claimant, Mr Clarke submits that the proper application of that test to 
the facts of the present case leads to the conclusion that vicarious li ability is made out. 
He further submits that other decided cases, including those which are concerned with 
claims for sexual abuse, provide additional helpful guidance. In that context, he 
emphasises in particular the role which Ms B egum was entrusted by t he Defendant to 
perform and the nature of the information in question. There were welfare and 
safeguarding aspects to both that role and that information, and these con siderations , as 
Mr Clarke submits, are relevant and give rise to an analogy with the sex ual abuse cases.  
4. On behalf of the Defendant, Mr Harding submits that the Morrison case is not only the 
starting point but for all practical purposes the finishing point for the analysis which is 
applicable in the present case. He draws attention to the fac tual similarities between the 
two cases: both concerned data breaches, and an employee who misused data to further 
the employee’s personal agenda (as opposed to furthering the business of the employer). 
Indeed, Mr Harding submit s that the argument against a finding of vicarious liability is, 
if anything, stronger in the present  case: for example, in Morrison the employee had 
misused for purposes of his own vendetta against the employer data which the employer 
had tasked him with using lawfully for purposes of the employer’s business, whereas 
in the present case Ms Begum misused for her own purposes of assisting the Claimant’s 
husband data which she was not required to use in any way by the Defendant and instead 
accessed impro perly and in breach of both the Defendant’s protocols and her  own 
contract of employment. Mr Harding contends that there is no need to look beyond 
Morrison for the purposes of deciding the present case, but in any event the further 
authorities upon which M r Clarke relie s do not assist  the Claimant , and indeed , in 
common with the outcome in Morrison , point to the conclusion that the claim fail s. 
5. I am grateful to both Counsel for their clear and carefully presented submissions.

3 
 6. The claim was originally framed  more widely , and included a case that the Defendant 
had a direct liability to the Claimant under various heads . However, that wider case was 
abandoned shortly before the beginning of the trial. In addition, neither side sought to 
challenge any aspect of t he evidence of the other. The trial accordingly proceeded 
without oral evidence, and on the basis of the witness statements and documents alone. 
Finally, the parties agreed that , if liability was made out, the sum of £6,250 represented 
the amount of compen sation which it would be appropriate to award to the Claimant.  
THE FACTS  
7. The Claimant  was married in 2015, and she and her husband later had two children.  
The marriage ran in to difficulties, which in due course culminated in a divorce. In the 
meantime, th eir problems led to the family having contact with social services, and to 
data relating to the Claimant and the children being compiled by the Defendant on a 
case manage ment  system utilised by the Defendant which is known as “Liquid  Logic”.  
8. On 1 March 20 19, before the marriage had come to an end and while it would appear 
the husband was still living in the family home, the Claimant made a complaint 
concerning the husband to the police . That in turn resulted in a Multi Agency Referral 
by the police to the Defendant , in essence  on the basis that the subject matter of the 
complaint gave rise to safeguarding concerns relating to the Claimant and the children.  
9. A few weeks later, the Claimant began to suspect that  information relating to he r had 
been leaked . Her family and  friends began asking her questions about why she had 
involved the p olice , and when she asked people why they believed that she had gone to 
the police it emerged that her husband was saying that he had been informed of this  by 
an individual who worked for the Council who he was now seeing . In light of what she 
had learned, the Claimant made complaints to both the police and the Defendant in 
relation to the way in which they had dealt with information concerning her. The 
comp laint against the police has evolved into separate proceedings, which have yet to 
be tried. The complaint against the Defendant has evolved into the present proceedings.  
10. In the meantime, the Defendant has accepted that it did not handle the complaint agai nst 
it in a satisfactory manner, and , following an investigation and an apology,  it paid the 
Claimant compensation in the sum of £2, 570 in respect of that separate shortcoming.  
11. It is the evidence of Ste ven Scott, who is employed within the IT team of the D efendant , 
that on 9 May 2019 he received a request to undertake a full audit trail of the  case 
records relating to the Claimant and the children to see how they had been accessed. 
That request followed earlier contact with the Defendant. According to Mr Scott ’s 
evidence, that contact included : two telephone calls on 29 April 2019 in which the 
Defendant was informed that the Claimant’s husband was saying that he had 
information which emanated from the Defendant and that he had a  mistress working 
for Childr en’s Services within the Defendan t; and an email from the Claimant dated 8 
May 2019 in which she stated (among other things) that her husband had pictures of 
her information on file and quotes of conversations held by Social Services , and had 
been showing people her records.  Mr Scott completed his report on 14 May 2019. It 
showed, in summary : (i) that a total of 10 reports relating to the Claimant had been 
accessed on the L iquid  Logic system on 26  April 2019 by Ms Begum, (ii) that 3 of those 
reports contained data of a highly sensitive nature which was capable of placing a 
family at risk; (iii) that Ms Begum had not accessed these records at any time prior to

4 
 26 April 2019, and was not shown to have printed anything  on that date ; and (iv) that 
Ms Begum had printed a 9-page document on 7 May 2019 which the Defendant 
suspects may have comprised information co pied and pasted from the records into a 
blank Word document . Mr Scott further states that it was “never established” whether 
Ms Begum had printed any documents from the system or if she prepared a Word 
document which contained information extracted from the records and that “It may well 
be that she took photographs of the information on her person al mobile phone”. Mr 
Scott based this last comment on the fact that Claimant had said in the course of her 
contact with the Defendant that her husband had pictures of her infor mation.  Finally, 
for reasons which he explains, involving encryption of USB driv es and audit trails of 
the same, Ms Begum could not have downloaded information onto a USB drive.  
12. While these matters were being investigated, Ms Begum  was denied access to the  
Defendant’s IT system. In light of what was discovered  about her conduct , Ms Be gum 
was dismissed, and , further, was arrested and charged with one offence of unauthorised 
access to computer material, contrary to section 1 of the Computer Misuse Act 1990. 
On 13 October 2020, following her conviction on her own plea of guilt y, she was 
sentenced  at Luton Crown Court to 3 months ’ imprisonment, suspended for 12 months, 
together with 150 hours of unpaid community service.  In passing sentence, Her Honour 
Judge Mensah  referred to and endorsed the comments  of Ms Begum’s line manager at 
the material time that her conduct was “deliberate, planned and goes against every  
professional code of conduct we adhere to and…  put the family at risk of harm” . 
13. In addition to the witness statement of Mr Scott, the Defendant served witness 
statements of Lei gh Jolly, the Defendant’s head of IT , and Diane Rushby, who is 
employed by the Defendant as head of service for the multi -agency safeguarding hub 
and family partnership service of the Defendant , which incorporates the Manor Family 
Resource Centre where Ms Begum was employed as a Contact Assessment Worker .  
14. Ms Rushby exhibits and refers to a statement of Jane Brown,  who was the manager of 
that Centre at the time when Ms Begum was employed there, which  was made as part 
of the criminal proceedings against Ms Begum. Ms Rushby agrees with Ms Brown ’s 
evidence  that Ms Begum ’s actions in accessing the files relating to the Claimant (and 
the children) was contrary to the Defendant’s professional code of conduct and the ethos 
of Ms Begum’s role as a worker at that Centre.  Ms Brown further explains that the 
office in which Ms Begum worked was equipped with computer terminals which were 
accessed by staff on a hot desk basis , that Ms Begu m used to sit on the end of a bank 
of three desks in the middle of the office where people could see what she was doing 
and her computer screen was visible to passers -by, and that a couple of months before 
the incident in question came to light  she moved t o sit in the corner by the window 
where nobody could see her screen or what she was doing. This did not cause Ms Brown 
to suspect that Ms Begum was doing anything wrong , although she found it strange.  
15. The Defendant’s evidence establishes the following:  
(1) Permission to view Liquid Logic records is not allocated on an individual ba sis, but 
rather is based on each employee’s role.  
(2) Contact centre workers are responsible for supervising contact for looked after 
children and can provide targeted parenting support.  They also write notes on the 
contacts taking place and may provide contact reports if requested by the court.

5 
 (3) In order to fulfil their roles, c ontact centre workers require unrestricted access to 
the system , for a number of reasons:   
First, they may be required to fulfil a contact request for a new file at short notice. 
If access were generally restricted, this would involve additional form filling, 
administrative support and delays. To gain access to a file if a general restriction 
were in place,  a contact centre worker would need to request authorisation from 
their line manager, which would then need to be agreed by a Head of Service. The 
request would then go through to the IT department who have a turnaround or 3 to 
5 days. The process of autho risation would therefore likely take around 6 days for 
each request. Restricted access would be highly impractical.  
Secon d, a contact centre worker may overhear information about other individuals 
whilst supervising a contact. The worker may then need to quickly access the 
records to see if the individual mentioned had an open file and gain contact with 
their social worker i f necessary. If access was restricted to a worker ’s own cases  
they would not be able to do this, which could cause potential safeguarding issues.  
Third, when a colleague is off sick or cannot attend a meeting, a contact centre 
worker will need to cover th at colleague’s case. This will involve accessing a 
colleague ’s files at short notice in order to gain details of the case. If access was 
restricted to each worker’s cases this would prevent effective management of cases.  
(4) Ms Begum’s level of access accorded  with standard practi ce, for the above reasons.  
(5) Individual records are only  restricted by locking if a specific need to do so arises, 
as was the case  once the breach which has led to the  present claim came to light.  
(6) The Social Care case management records  within Liquid Logic are restricted in that 
only those people who work within Social Services can access the records. Some 
partner organisations, such as the NHS, may have access to the records but th at 
access is equally controlled by appropriate security boundaries and permissions . 
(7) Each individual who joins Social Services  receive s training on Liquid Logic. It is 
made clear within induction and training that access is audited and that they should 
only ever access records as required.  There is no ambiguity at all in th is regard.  
(8) All contact centre workers are made aware that they should notify their line 
managers if they have a personal connection to any clients on the system. Their 
access to these cases is then restricted. Ms Begum would have been  aware of the 
need to inform her line manager of her connection to the Claimant (i.e. by reason 
of her relationship with the Claimant’s husband). If Ms Begum had followed the 
correct process, her access to the Claimant’s files would have been restricted.  
(9) Throughout her induction and on a regular basis Ms Begum would have received 
data protection and GDPR training. She did in fact receive data protection training 
on 20 April 2016 and GDPR training on 16 May 2018.  The requirement to access 
files only as neces sary is something which is reiterated regularly at service meetings 
and team meetings. The importance of not accessing case files unless necessary 
could also be expected to be covered at one -to-one supervision meetings. Su ch 
meetings take place around once  a month for contact centre workers.

6 
 (10) Although in light of her role it was necessary for Ms Begum to have required 
elevated levels of access within Liquid Logic , as that would have been crucial to 
her work , in this instance she accessed records when she ha d no need to do so. That 
was an unlawful accessing of records. She clear ly knew that what she was doing 
was wrong , as borne out by the fact that she pleaded guilty to a criminal offence.  
(11) Liquid Logic is set up to operate by the Defendant in exactly the same way in other 
Local Authorities across the country. As far as is known, in other Local Authorities 
access is not restricted on a case by case or worker by worker basis once it is 
establi shed that an individual within the role requires access to Liquid Logic. Other 
Local Authorities do not lock down the systems for Contact Assessment Workers.  
(12) The Defendant could not have done anything differently or included anything 
within its systems to have prevented what Ms Begum did.  
16. These points are borne out or amplified by the contents of extensive exhibits, which 
include  the following documents of the Defendant: (i) Human Resources Security 
Standards dated January 2010, (ii) Code of Conduct for Emp loyees, (iii) policies 
referred to at Section 2.2.2.3 of the Human Resources Information Security Standards 
dated January 2010, and (iv) Legal responsibilities policy . Further, the log in screen 
contains a number of warnings regarding the fact that log ins  are subject to audit and 
GDPR requirements generally: when logging on, an individual is required to make their 
way through three screens to enter their log -in, then enter their password and then 
answer a security question, and the warnings remain in place  on all three screens.  
THE RELEVANT LEGAL PRINCIPLES  
17. In Morrison payroll data was provided by his employer to an internal auditor, Andrew 
Skelton, for the sole purpose of passing it on to the external auditors. Although Mr 
Skelton carried out that task, he  also unlawfully copied the data and uploaded it onto a 
publicly accessible website. His motive was to cause harm to his employer, because he 
bore a grudge against it.  In furtherance of that objective, on the day when the 
employer’s financial results were due to be announced, Mr Skelton also sent the data to 
a number of national newspapers. Other employees whose personal data had thus been 
disclosed  brought claims against the employer for breach of con fidence and misuse of 
private information on the basis that the employer was vicariously liable for Mr 
Skelton’s  wrongdoing. Th ose claims  succeeded before Langstaff J, and the Court of 
Appeal upheld th at decision , but that outcome was reversed in the Supreme  Court.  
18. Lord Reed PSC reviewed the authorities on vicarious liability. At [22] Lord Reed 
referred to the judgment of Lord Nicholls in Dubai Aluminium Co Ltd v Salaam  [2003] 
2 AC 366 . At [23] Lord Reed stated that Lord Nicholls had identified the general 
principle applicable to vicarious liability arising out of a relationship of employment as 
being that  which I have already cited in [ 2] above : “… the wrongful conduct must be 
so closely connected with acts the employee was authorised to do that, for the purp oses 
of the liability of the employer to third parties, it may fairly and properly be regarded 
as done by the employee while acting in the ordinary course of his employment ”. At 
[24] Lord Reed said : 
“The general principle set out by Lord Nicholls in Dubai 
Aluminium , like many other principles of the law of tort, has to

7 
 be applied with regard to the circumstances of the case before 
the court and the assistance provided by previous court 
decisions. The words ‘fairly and properly’ are not, therefore, 
intended as an invitation to judges to decide cases according to 
their personal sense of justice, but require them to consider how 
the guidance derived from decided cases furnishes a solution to 
the case before the court.  Judges should therefore identify from 
the d ecided cases the factors or principles which point towards 
or away from vicarious liability in the case before the court, and 
which explain why it should or should not be imposed. 
Following that approach, cases can be decided on a basis which 
is principled  and consistent. ” 
19. At [31], Lord Reed explained why the trial judge and the Court of Appeal had 
misunderstood the principles governing vicarious liability in a number of relevant 
respects . These included : (1) that the disclosure of the data on the internet did not form 
part of Mr Skelton ’s functions or field of activities, in the sense in which those words 
had been used by Lord Toulson JSC  in Mohamud v Wm Morrison Supermarkets plc  
[2016] AC 677; it was not an act wh ich Mr Skelton was authorised to do, as Lord 
Nicholls put it ; (2) the fact that the 5 factors listed by Lord Phillips in Various Claimants 
v Catholic Child Welfare Society  [2013] 2 AC 1 at [35] existed was nothing to the point ; 
(3) although  there  was a close temporal link and an unbroken chain of causation linking 
the provision of the data to Mr Skelton for the purpose of transmitting it to  the external 
auditors and his disclosing it on the  internet,  a temporal  or causal  connection  does not 
in itself  satisf y the close connection test ; and (4) the reason why Mr Skelton acted 
wrongfully was not irrelevant , but, on the contrary, it was “highly material ” whether he 
was acting on his employer ’s business or  for purely  personal  reason s. 
20. When considering afresh the question of whether the employer was vicariously liable 
for Mr Skelton’s wrongdoing, at [33] Lord Reed posed the question of whether Mr 
Skelton’s wrongful disclosure of the data was “so closely connected with the collation 
and t ransmission of the data to [the external auditors] that, for the purposes of the 
liability of his employer to third parties, the disclosure may fairly and properly be 
regarded as made by him while acting in the ordinary course of his employment .” 
21. At [35], Lord Reed stated that the mere fact that Mr Skelton’s employment gave him 
the opportunity to commit the wrongful act would not be sufficient to warrant the 
imposition of vicarious liability, and then said of the approach that Mr Skelton’s 
disclosure of the  data on the internet was “closely related to what he was tasked to do” : 
“… The fallacy in that approach was explained by Lord 
Wilberforce in Kooragang Investments Pty Ltd v Richardson & 
Wrench Ltd  [1982] AC462, which concerned an employee who 
was authoris ed to carry out valuations, and negligently carried 
out a valuation without authority from his employers and not on 
their behalf. Lord Wilberforce rejected the argument that so long 
as the employee is doing acts of the same kind as those which it 
is within  his authority to do, the employer is liable, and is not 
entitled to show that the employee had no authority to do them. 
He said at p 473:

8 
 the underlying principle remains that a servant, even 
while performing acts of the class which he was 
authorised, or employed, to do, may so clearly depart 
from the scope of his employment that his master will 
not be liable for his wrongful acts. ” 
22. At [36] Lord Reed explained that “ in applying the close connection test it is necessary 
to have regard to the assistance prov ided by previous court decisions ”. He continued : 
“37 The basic principle normally applicable to cases where an 
employee is engaged in an independent personal venture was 
explained in Joel v Morison  (1834) 6 C&P501, which 
concerned a claim for personal injuries brought by a plaintiff 
who had been knocked down by a cart driven by the 
defendant’s employee. Parke B said at p 503:  
The master is only liable where the servant is acting in 
the course of his  employment. If he was going out of his 
way, against his masters implied commands, when 
driving on his master’s business, he will make his 
master liable; but if he was going on a frolic of his own, 
without being at all on his master’s business, the master 
will not be liable.  
38 More recently, the issue of liability for acts performed by an 
employee in the course of an independent venture of his own 
was considered by Lord Nicholls in Dubai Aluminium  [2003] 
2 AC 366, para 32:  
A distinction is to be drawn between  cases such as 
Hamlyn v John Houston & Co  [1903] 1 KB 81, where 
the employee was engaged, however misguidedly, in 
furthering his employer’s business, and cases where the 
employee is engaged solely in pursuing his own 
interests: on a “frolic of his own ”, in the language of the 
time-honoured catch phrase . . . The matter stands 
differently when the employee is engaged only in 
furthering his own interests, as distinct from those of his 
employer. Then he acts as to be in e ffect a stranger in 
relation to his emp loyer with respect to the act he has 
committed: see Isaacs J in Bugge v Brown  (1919) 26 
CLR 110, 118.”  
23. Having reviewed a number of other authorities for the purpose of considering such facts 
as may give rise to a claim in vicarious liability , Lord Reed concluded at [47]:  
“All these examples illustrate the distinction drawn by Lord 
Nicholls at para 32 of Dubai Aluminium  [2003] 2 AC 366 
between ‘cases … where the employee was engaged, however 
misguidedly, in furthering his employer’s business, and cases 
where  the employee is engaged solely in pursuing his own

9 
 interests: on a “frolic of his own”, in the language of the time -
honoured catch phrase.’ In the present case, it is abundantly clear 
that Skelton was not engaged in furthering his employer’s 
business when  he committed the wrongdoing in question. On the 
contrary, he was pursuing a personal vendetta, seeking 
vengeance for the disciplinary proceedings some months earlier. 
In those circumstances, applying the test laid down by Lord 
Nicholls in Dubai Aluminium  in the light of the circumstances of 
the case and the relevant precedents, Skelton’s wrongful conduct 
was not so closely connected with acts which he was authorised 
to do that, for the purposes of Morrisons’ liability to third parties, 
it can fairly and pr operly be regarded as done by him while 
acting in the ordinary course of his employment.”  
24. Mr Clarke drew my attention to a number of other decided cases, including Lister v 
Hesley Hall Ltd  [2002] 1 AC 215, which concerned the sexual abuse of children by th e 
warden of a school boarding house. Mr Clarke relied on the following statement in that 
case by Lord Millet t at [79]: “So it is no answer to say that the employee was guilty of 
intentional wrongdoing, or that his act was not merely tortious but criminal, or that he 
was acting exclusively for his own benefit, or that he was acting contrary to express 
instructions, or that h is conduct was the very negation of his employer’s duty.”  
25. In my judgment, however, this statement must be read in context. Lord Millett ’s 
propositions  are far from being open ended, as the remainder of [79] makes clear : 
“The cases show that where an emplo yer undertakes the care of 
a client ’s property and entrusts the task to an employee who 
steals the property, the employer is vicariously liable  … 
Experience shows that the risk of theft by an employee is 
inherent in a business which involves entrusting the  custody of a 
customer ’s property to employees. But the theft must be 
committed by the very employee to whom the custody of the 
property is entrusted. He does more than make the most of an 
opportunity presented by the fact of his employment. He takes 
advan tage of the position in which the employer has placed him 
to enable the purposes of the employer ’s business to be achieved. 
If the boys in the present case had been sacks of potatoes and the 
defendant, having been engaged to take care of them, had 
entruste d their care to one of its employees, it would have been 
vicariously liable for any criminal damage done to them by the 
employee in question, though not by any other employee. Given 
that the employer ’s liability does not arise from the law of 
bailment, it is not immediately apparent that it should make any 
difference that the victims were boys, that the wrongdoing took 
the form of sexual abuse, and that it was committed for the 
personal gratification of the employee. ”  
26. Lord Millett’s reference to the need, if vicarious liability is to be imposed, for the 
wrongdoing to be carried out by “the very employee to whom the custody of the 
property is entrusted” on the basis that such an employee “does more than make the 
most of an opportunity presented by the fact o f his employment” and instead “takes

10 
 advantage of the position in which the employer has placed him to enable the purposes 
of the employer’s business to be achieved” is echoed in, and indeed appears to be 
derived from, another of the cases to which I was referred by Mr Clarke,  namely Morris 
v C W Martin & Sons Ltd [1966] 1 QB 716. Lord Millett provided the following 
synopsis of that case in Lister v Hesley Hall Ltd  [2002] 1 AC 215  at [76] : 
“… a firm of cleaners was held vicariously liable to a customer  
whose fur was stolen by one of its employees. The firm was a 
sub-bailee for reward, but the decision was not based on the 
firm’s own failure to take care of the fur and deliver it upon 
termination of the bailment. It was held vicariously liable for the 
conversion of the fur by its employee. Diplock LJ said, at p. 737, 
that he based his decision:  
“on the ground that the fur was stolen by the very 
servant  whom the defendants as bailees for reward had 
employed to take care of it and clean it ” (my emphasis).  
Salmon LJ too, at p 740, was anxious to make it plain that the 
conclusion which he had reached depended on the fact that the 
thief was  
“the servant thro ugh whom the defendants chose to 
discharge their duty to take reasonable care of the 
plaintiff's fur. ” 
He added, at pp 740 -741, that  
“A bailee for reward is not answerable for a theft by any 
of his servants but only for a theft by such of them as 
are deput ed by him to discharge some part of his duty 
of taking reasonable care. A theft by any servant who is 
not employed to do anything in relation to the goods 
bailed is entirely outside the scope of his employment 
and cannot make the master liable. ” 
The employ ee’s position gave him the opportunity to steal the 
fur, but as Diplock LJ was at pains to make clear, at p. 737, 
this was not enough to make his employer liable. What 
brought the theft within the scope of his employment and 
made the firm liable was that i n the course of its business the 
firm had entrusted him with the care of the fur, and he stole it 
while it was in his custody as an employee of the firm. ” 
27. In Morrison , Lord Reed referred  at [23] to the fact that “the close connection test has 
been applied differently in cases concerned with the sexual abuse of children, which 
cannot be regarded as something done by the employee while acting in the ordinary 
course of his employment” and where, instead , “the courts have emphasised the 
importance of cr iteria that are particularly relevant to that form of wrongdoing, such as 
the employer’s conferral of authority on the employee over the victims, which he has 
abused”.  In my view, the passages from Lister relied on by Mr Clarke bear this out.

11 
 Moreover, alt hough this area of the law is certainly not without difficulties, it seems to 
me that this is a principled approach, and, indeed, as Lord Millett explains, one which 
is not novel but instead accords with th at taken in cases involving custody of chattels.  
28. Mr Clarke’s main additional line of argument begins with Lord Steyn’s reference in 
Lister at [27] to the “luminous and illuminating judgments” of the Canadian Supreme 
Court in Bazley v Curry  174 DLR(4th) 45 and Jacobi v Griffiths  174 DLR(4th) 71 and 
his sug gestion concerning the issues associated with the principle of vicarious liability 
that “ Wherever such problems are considered in future in the common law world these 
judgments will be the starting point ”. In support of his argument that the principles 
enunciated in these cases are not confined to cases of sexual abuse, Mr Clarke pointed 
out that they had recently been applied by the Court of Appeal in a different context.   
29. Mr Clarke placed particular reliance on McLachlin J’s consideration of the principl es 
of vicarious liability in Bazley  at [41] and [42] as follows : 
“41. Reviewing the jurisprudence, and considering the policy 
issues involved, I conclude that in determining whether an 
employer is vicariously liable for an employee’s 
unauthorized, intentional wrong in cases where precedent is 
inconclusive, courts should be guided by the following 
principles:  
(1) They should openly confront the question of whether 
liability should lie against the employer, rather than obscuring 
the deci sion beneath semantic discussions of ‘scope of 
employment’ and ‘mode of conduct’.  
(2) The fundamental question is whether the wrongful act is 
sufficiently related to conduct authorized by the employer to 
justify the imposition of vicarious liability. Vicar ious liability 
is generally appropriate where there is a significant 
connection between the creation or enhancement of a risk and 
the wrong that accrues therefrom, even if unrelated to the 
employer’s desires. …  
(3) In determining the sufficiency of the con nection between 
the employer’s creation or enhancement of the risk and the 
wrong complained of, subsidiary factors may be considered. 
When related to intentional torts, the relevant facts may 
include, but are not limited to the following:  
(a) the opportuni ty that the enterprise afforded the employee 
to abuse his or her power;  
(b) the extent to which the wrongful act may have furthered 
the employer’s aims (and hence be more likely to have been 
committed by the employee);

12 
 (c) the extent to which the wrongful act was related to friction, 
confrontation or intimacy inherent in the employer’s 
enterprise;  
(d) the extent of power conferred on the employee in relation 
to the victim;  
(e) the vulnerability of potential victims to wrongful exercise 
of the employee’s pow er. 
42. Applying these general considerations to sexual abuse by 
employees, there must be a strong connection between what 
the employer was asking the employee to do (the risk created 
by the employer’s enterprise) and the wrongful act. It must be 
possible to say that the employer significantly increased the 
risk of the harm by putting the employee in his or her position 
and requiring him to perform the assigned tasks. … an 
incidental or random attack by an employee that merely 
happens to take place on the e mployer’s premises during the 
working hours will scarcely justify holding the employer 
liable. Such an attack is unlikely to be related to the business 
the employer is conducting or what the employee was asked 
to do and, hence, to any risk that was created . Nor is the 
imposition of liability likely to have a significant deterrent 
effect; short of closing the premises or discharging all 
employees, little can be done to avoid the random wrong. Nor 
is foreseeability of harm used in negligence law the test. Wha t 
is required is a material increase in the risk as a consequence 
of the employer’s enterprise and the duties he entrusted to the 
employee, mindful of the policies behind vicarious liability.”  
30. In Chell  v Tarmac Cement and Lime Ltd [2022] EWCA Civ 7  these p rinciples were 
applied by the judge at first instance when considering the issue of vicarious liability . 
In that  case the claimant was employed by a company (“R”) as a site fitter at a site 
which was operated and controlled by the defendant (“Tarmac”). The  claimant was 
providing services for the purposes of Tarmac’s business. On the date in question, a 
fitter employed by Tarmac , (“H”) , entered the workshop on that site, and when the 
claimant bent down to pick up a length of cut steel, H put two pellet targe ts on the bench 
close to the claimant’s right ear and hit them with a hammer causing a loud explosion 
next to the claimant’s right ear . As a result of this, the claimant suffered personal injury, 
including noise induced hearing loss and tinnitus.  Noting th at these principles had been 
applied by the court below when determining whether Tarmac was vicariously liable 
for H’s acts, and that no point was taken on the fact that the case was not a case of 
sexual abuse, the Court of Appeal applied th ese principles as well. The judge  dismissed 
the claim based on vicarious liability . The Court of Appeal upheld that decision.  
31. Mr Clarke’s central proposition was that it would be appropriate to apply the factors set 
out at [41(3)] of Bazley  to the facts of the present case,  and that this exercise supports 
the conclusion that the Defendant is vicariously liable for the actions of Ms Begum.

13 
 32. For his part, Mr Harding did not accept that argument, or that these factors, if 
applicable, would result in success for the Claimant . As noted above, his main 
contention is that the answer to the issue of vicarious liability in the present case is 
provide d by application of the guidance set out in Morrison alone. This includes the 
need to compare the circumstances of th is case with those of other decided cases in 
order to assess how much assistance is provided by previous court decisions . In that 
regard , he submitted that the facts and outcome of Morrison are both highly pertinent.  
33. Mr Harding submitted  that the following principles can be distilled from Morrison : 
(1) In a case concerned with vicarious liability arising out of a relationship of 
employment, the test is whether the wrongful conduct was so closely connected 
with acts the employee was authorised to do that, for the purposes of the liability of 
his employer, it may fairly and properly be regarded as done by the employee while 
acting in the ordinary c ourse of his employment.  
(2) Cases involving sexual abuse have followed a different approach, and focus on 
different factors, such as misuse or abuse of authority over the victims, over whom 
the perpetrator has some element of responsibility or trust.  
(3) Applying  the test in (1) above, the critical distinction is between cases where, on 
the one hand, the employee was engaged, however misguidedly, in furthering his  
employer’s business, and cases where the employee is engaged solely in pursuing 
his own interests: on  a ‘frolic of his own’.  
(4) The motive of the tortfeasor is a highly relevant factor. If they are acting for 
‘personal’ reasons this is a strong indication that they are not purporting, even 
misguidedly, to further their employer’s business.  
(5) The fact that empl oyment provided a tortfeasor with the opportunity (for example, 
in terms of access to the information) to commit the wrongful act is never sufficient 
to establish vicarious liability. The focus should not be on the fact that there is close 
temporal or caus al connection between the work and the wrongdoing. It will almost 
always be true that the wrongdoing has occurred against the background of the 
employment and whilst the employee is ‘at work’. However, it is a ‘fallacy’ to think 
that simply because the wro ngdoing occurs whilst the employee is performing acts 
of ‘the class of which he was authorised’, it is thereby sufficiently closely connected 
to it. If the employee acts for personal reasons, rather than purporting to further the 
employee’s business, it ma y well be the case that they have so clearly departed from 
the scope of their employment that the employer will not be vicariously liable.  
34. As an illustration of this last proposition, Mr Harding relied on Irving v Post Office  
(1987) IRLR 289. In that case, the duties of a post office employee included the sorting 
of mail at his depot, and the delivering of mail on his round, which involved going to 
his District Office to sort mail preparatory to delivering it.  While at work, h e saw an 
envelope addressed to his immediate neighbours, with whom he ha d fallen out. He d id 
not deliver to the district where his neighbours lived, and normally he would not have 
come across mail addressed to them . The  letter in question had inadvertently  been mis -
sorted. His duty was to put it into the mis -sort box. Before he did so, he wrote on the 
back of the envelope a racial remark and added a cartoon of a smiling mouth and eyes.

14 
 35. The central issue in that case was whether the Post Office was vicarious ly liable for the 
act of t he employee. The claim was brought by his neighbours, who contend ed that it 
was, and that his conduct was an act of discrimination against them under section 1(1) 
of the Race Relations Act, 1976, and actionable accordingly . The ju dge at first instance 
held that the employee , when he wrote the abusive words, was not acting in the course 
of his employment , and that the claim accordingly failed. The Court of Appeal agreed.  
36. Fox LJ said : 
“The doctrine of vicarious liability is necessary for the 
reasonable protection of innocent third parties. But out of 
fairness to employers, limits have to be set to it. That is, perhaps, 
more particularly evident in a case such as the present where the 
Post Office is sought to be made liable fo r the wilful wrongdoing 
of Edwards, which the Post Office in no way authorised. In my 
judgment, what Edwards did was an act which cannot be 
regarded as being merely an unauthorised way of performing the 
duties for which he was employed, namely, to sort and  deliver 
mail. Out of personal malevolence to the addressees (or one of 
them) he wrote an offensive message on the envelope. That was 
not the performance of any duty for which he was employed. His 
employment provided the opportunity for his misconduct, but  
the misconduct formed no part of the performance of his duties 
and was in no way directed to the performance of those duties. It 
was just a piece of spite on the spur of the moment. He was, of 
course, authorised for postal purposes to write upon envelopes , 
but what he wrote, and the purpose of what he wrote, had no 
connection with the performance of his duties. ” 
37. Sheldon J said : 
“… [Counsel] submitted that as the “job upon which Mr 
Edwards was engaged” at the material time was that of sorting 
mail, his act in writing on the envelope — albeit not merely 
unauthorised but expressly prohibited — was within the scope 
of that employment. As I understand the argument, it was to the 
effect that the time spent by Mr Edwards in writing his comments 
would have been so short, such a minor interruption in the 
overall legitimate process of sorting the mail, that it should all 
be treated as part of one transaction: and that to differentiate it, 
in this respect, from actions that immediately preceded and 
followed it, would b e unrealistic and amount to the very process 
of dissection that Diplock LJ was discouraging [i.e. in Ilkiw v 
Samuels & Ors.  (1963) 1 WLR 991 at 1004].  In my judgment, 
however, such an argument demonstrates the danger of taking 
passages out of context, and begs the question: whether Mr 
Edwards act in writing on that envelope, however short the time 
that it took, was in fact part of the process of sorting the mail and 
was within the scope of his employment.

15 
 In the event, in my judgment, the Tribunal ’s finding  that to write 
that offensive message on the envelope addressed to the 
plaintiffs was no part of the work that Mr Edwards was employed 
to do is not open to criticism; on the contrary, in my view it was 
plainly right. On the facts, indeed, to have found oth erwise 
would have been to import the proposition which Heasmans  [i.e. 
Heasmans v Clarity Cleaning Co. Ltd , The Times, 23 January 
1987 — in which it was held by the Court of Appeal that a 
cleaning contractor engaged to clean offices was not vicariously 
liable for the tort of its employee, whose duties included cleaning 
the office telephones, in dishonestly using the telephones for his 
own purposes]; and the Keppel Bus Co. Ltd.  [i.e. Keppel Bus Co. 
Ltd. v. Sa'ad bin Ahmad  (1974) 1 WLR 1082, in which the 
emplo yers were held not to be liable for a violent assault by a 
bus conductor upon a passenger in his bus] cases (inter alia) have 
shown to be wrong. ” 
38. In those passage s, as it seems to me, Sheldon J was addressing an argument very similar 
to the “field of activities” test which Mr Clarke invited me to apply in the present case.  
DISCUSSION  
39. While I have every sympathy for the Claimant  and the predicament in which she was 
placed by Ms Begum’s acts , I have little hesitation in holding that the claim based on 
vicarious liability is not made out, essentially for the reasons advanced by Mr Harding.   
40. In this case, as was also true of the employee in Morrison , in carrying out the acts upon 
which the claim is based  Ms Begum was in no way engaged, whether misguidedly o r 
not, in furthering the business of her employer, the Defendant.  
41. Although Ms Begum gained the opportunity to access and process data relating to the 
Claimant (and the children) by reason of the unrestricted access to the Liquid Logic 
system which she was  required to be afforded in order to perform her role as a c ontact 
centre worker , it formed no part of any work which she was engaged by the Defendant 
to do to access or process those particular records. Indeed, if Ms Begum had disclosed 
her connection wit h the Claimant’s husband, as she ought to have done, her access to 
these records would have been  restricted  by the Defendant .  
42. In doing what she did, Ms Begum was engaged solely in pursuing h er own agenda, 
namely divulging information to the Claimant’s husband, with whom she had some 
relationship . Further, that was to the detriment of the Claimant (and the children) whose 
safety and interests as users of the Defendant’ s services it formed part of Ms Begum’s 
core dut ies to further and protect.  
43. This w as, in my judgment,  a classic case of Ms Begum being on a “frolic of h er own” .  
44. In terms of comparison with the facts of Morrison , in my opinion it matters not that Ms 
Begum’s particular “frolic” took the form that it did, as opposed to taking the f orm of 
a vendetta against her employer.

16 
 45. In fact, as already discussed, the present case is stronger from the Defendant ’s point of 
view, because Mr Skelton was engaged in using unlawfully data which he had been 
tasked with processing lawfully, whereas in the present case Ms Begum was not tasked 
in any shape or form with either accessing or disseminating the information in q uestion.  
46. Nor, in my judgment, does the safeguarding element of Ms Begum’s job assist the 
Claimant’s case. Indeed, in my view that feature merely serves to underline how plainly 
Ms Begum was not engaged in furthering the business of the Defendant, but was instead 
engaged in furthering her own ends, in contradiction to those of the Defendant.  
47. In those circumstances, applying the authoritative test laid down in Morrison  in the 
light of the circumstances of th is case and the relevant case law , Ms Begum ’s wrongful 
conduct was not so closely connected with acts which she was authorised to do that, for 
the purposes of  the Defendant’s liability to third parties, it can fairly and properly be 
regarded as done by her while acting in the ordinary course of h er employment.  
48. On that basis, I do not consider that it is necessary to consider the factors set out in 
Bazley at [41(3)]. In this regard, I observe that Bazley  was cited in argument in 
Morrison , but is not referred to in the judgment of Lord Reed. If, contr ary to the 
foregoing, these factors call for separate consideration, my brief views are as follows:  
(a)  The Defendant did afford Ms Begum the opportunity to abuse her position. 
However, that is almost always the case in any instance of employee abuse of 
position; it is not sufficient by itself to give rise to vicarious liability; and, on the 
unchallenged evidence before me, the Defendant could not have done otherwise.  
(b)  Ms Begum’s wrongful act s did not in any wa y furthe r the employer’s aims . They 
were n ot more likely to have been committed by the employee  for this reason.  
(c)  Ms Begum’s wrongful act s were not related to friction, confrontation or intimacy 
inherent in the Defendant’s enterprise . This factor seems to me most readily 
applicable in cases of  physical interaction between employees or interaction 
between the individual tortfeasor and a third party or third parties, such as occurs  
in (but may not be limited to) the sexual abuse cases, and this was not such a case.  
(d)  Like considerations apply to the question of the extent of power conferred on the 
employee in relation to the victim . This seems to me most readily applicable in 
cases involving (typically physical) interaction with the victim . If and to the extent 
that it  applies to the employer permitting the employee to access information 
relating to a victim, the Defendant did not confer power on Ms Begum to access 
the Claimant’s information: Ms Begum took advantage of the opportunity which 
the Defendant’s working pract ices necessarily afforded to her to do that 
improperly, surreptitiously and for her own purposes , which had nothing to do with 
any role or authority which the Defendant assigned to her vis -à-vis the Claimant.  
(e)  It seems to me that the vulnerability of p otential victims to wrongful exercise of the 
employee’s power  could be relevant with regard to someone like Ms Begum if she 
was put in charge of dealing with a particular service user, perhaps in the context 
of arranging contact . I am prepared to assume th at such service users, or at least 
some of them, may well be vulnerable in this way. However, Ms Begum was never

17 
 put in charge of any aspect of the affairs of the Claimant (or the children) , or indeed 
information relating to them.  I do not consider that this factor assists the Claimant.  
CONCLUSION  
49. For all these reasons , this claim fails and must be dismissed.  
50. I ask Counsel to agree an order which reflects the above. I will deal with submissions 
on any points which remain in dispute as to the form of the ord er, any other issues such 
as costs and permission to appeal, either (if Counsel agree) on the basis of written 
submissions, or when judgment is handed down  or if that is not possible on an adjourned 
hearing on some convenient date. I f permission to appeal is in issue, I would intend that 
the time for seeking permission to appeal should not start running in the meantime.