Neutral Citation Number: [2020] EWHC 1611 (Admin ) 
 
Case No: CO/33/2020  
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE  
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION  
DIVISIONAL COURT  
Royal Courts of Justice  
Strand, London, WC2A 2LL  
 
Date: 19/06/2020  
 
Before  : 
 
LORD JUSTICE DINGEMANS  
AND  
MR JUSTI CE DOVE  
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Between :  
 
 Peter John Winder  Appellant  
 - and -  
 Director of Public Prosecutions  Respondent  
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Leslie Smith  (instructe d by Hogan Brown Solicitors ) for the  Appellant  
Paul Jarvis  (instructed by the Crown Prosecution Service ) for the Respondent  
 
Hearing date: 11th June 2020  
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Approved Judgment  
 
 
Covid -19 Protocol:   This judgment was ha nded down by the Judge remotely by 
circulation to the parties’ representatives by email and release to Bailii.  The date and 
time for hand -down is deemed to be listed on 19th June 2020 at 1030.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.   
 
 Mr Justice Dove  :  
1. This is an appeal by way of case stated f ollowing a hearing at Poole Magistrates ’ 
Court on 3 September 2019 at which, following an application by the appellant, the 
District Judge ruled that the charges he faced had been brought in time.  
2. The complainants in this matter, Mr and Mrs Jones, are cust omers of the Santander 
Bank. They had been on holiday, and on return noticed potentially fraudulent activity 
occurring on their bank account. Mrs Jones rang the bank on 13 March 2018 and 
spoke to a fraud investigator, who it is clear was the appellant. The y had a heated 
argument. The prosecution case is that the appellant then used the bank’s internal 
system to discover the complainants’ mobile and landline telephone numbers. On 18 
March 2018 and 19 March 2018 , Mrs Jones received a number of calls on her la ndline 
from a withheld number. These were concluded to be harassing rather than 
threatening calls. On 20 March 2018 Mr Jones received a call from a male saying that 
he knew where Mr Jones lives and that he was coming to get him.  
3. On 18 April 2018 the appell ant was arrested and interviewed by the police and his 
mobile phones were seized and subsequently examined. In the interview the appellant 
gave no comment and provided a prepared statement in relation to the allegations 
which were put to him. By 6 December  2018 the mobile phone examinations had 
been completed, and a file had been compiled for submission to the CPS. The file was 
reviewed by a senior police officer and it was submitted to the CPS on 18 January 
2019. In a certificate signed on 17 July 2019 by a Senior Crown prosecutor she 
certifies that she had evidence within her knowledge sufficient to justify the 
commencement of criminal proceedings on 5 February 2019 and that she made a 
decision to charge the appellant on 4 March 2019.  
4. The appellant was cha rged with offences under section 127 of the Communications 
Act 2003 (see below) by way of a postal requisition dated 17 May 2019. As set out 
above, on his behalf it was contended, unsuccessfully, before the District Judge that 
the prosecution had been comm enced out of time. This appeal and the questions posed 
by the District Judge centre on the question of whether or not that decision was 
correct.  
5. At the hearing on 3 September 2019 it was indicated on the appellant’s behalf that a 
guilty plea would be like ly to be entered in due course. A pre -sentence report was 
obtained.  At a hearing on 30 September 2019 t he District Judge was informed of the 
application that had just been made to state a case in respect of his ruling that the 
prosecution was in time. The District Judge indicated that in the event it was 
necessary for him to sentence the appellant he would be minded to impose a 
community disposal. Thus, the view was taken that the outcome of this question in 
relation to the timeliness of charging is centra l to the result of these proceedings.  
6. The charges which were preferred were as follows:  
“That between 17 March 2018 and 21 March 2018 19 Brookfield 
Avenue Liverpool L23 3DN Mr Winder persistently made use of an 
electronic communications network for the pur poses of causing 
annoyance, inconvenience or needless anxiety to another, contrary to 
section 127 (2) (c) and (3) of the Communications Act 2003;

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.   
 
 That on 20 March 2018 at 19 Brookfield Avenue Liverpool L23 3DN 
Mr Winder sent by means of a public electronic communications 
network a communication that was grossly offensive or of an indecent, 
abusive or menacing character, contrary to section 127 (1) ( a) and (3) 
of the Communications Act 2003.”  
7. Section 127 of the Communications Act 2003, so far as relevant to t hese proceedings, 
provides as follows:  
“127 (1) a person is guilty of an offence if he - 
(a) sends by means of a public electronic communications network a 
message or other matter that is grossly offensive or of an indecent, 
obscene or menacing character; o r 
(b) causes any such message o r matter to be so sent.  
(2) a person is guilty of an offence if, for the purpose of causing 
annoyance, inconvenience or needless anxiety to another, he - 
(a) sends by means of a public electronic communications network, a 
mess age that he knows to be false,  
(b) causes such a message to be sent; or  
(c) persistently makes use of a public electronic communications 
network.  
(3) a person guilty of an offence under this section shall be liable, on 
summary conviction, to imprisonment f or a term not exceeding 6 
months or a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale, or to both.  
… 
(5) an information or complaint relating to an offence under this 
section may be tried by a magistrates ’ court in England and Wales or 
Northern I reland if  it is laid or made - 
(a) before the end of the period of 3 years beginning with the day on 
which the offence was committed, and  
(b) before the end of the period of 6 months beginning with the day on 
which evidence comes  to the knowledge of the prosecutor w hich the 
prosecutor considers sufficient to justify proceedings.  
… 
(7) a certificate of a prosecutor as to the date on which evidence 
described in subsection (5)( b) or (6)( b) came to his or her knowledge is 
conclusive evidence of that fact.”

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.   
 
 8. The offences c reated by section 127(1) and (2) of the 2003 Act are summary only. 
Section 127(5) provides time limits for the bringing of a charge. It is sensible to 
conclude that the postal requisition process equates, for the purposes of section 
127(5), to the laying o f an information given that it is the commencement of the 
criminal proceedings.  
9. It is common ground that, whilst the application to the Magistrates ’ Court for the 
court to state a case pursuant to section 111 of the Magistrates ’ Court Act 1980 was 
made in time, the application to appeal to this court was brought one day out of time. 
It was further common ground that this court has jurisdiction to extend time for the 
appeal to be brought before the court by virtue of  the provisions of the CPR  (see CPR 
52.15). The explanation for the failure to comply with the time limit is simply that 
there was an administrative oversight by those representing the appellant. It is pointed 
out that it was not the appellant’s fault that this occurred. Whilst it is beyond 
argume nt that a failure to comply with the time limit provided in CPR PD 52E  para 
2.2 is a serious failure to which significant weight should attach, and bearing in mind 
the fact that there is in truth no real excuse for the default, nonetheless having regard 
to the particular circumstances of the case and in particular the fact that the notice of 
appeal was submitted only one day to o late and the consequences for the appellant are 
very significant involving criminal liability, I am satisfied that it would noneth eless be 
just to allow the appeal to proceed out of time.  
10. A further preliminary point has been raised in relation to whether it is proper for the 
court to consider this appeal, on the basis that it is in effect an appeal by way of case 
stated a t an interlo cutory stage  of proceedings . Mr Smith, who appears on behalf of 
the appellant, contends that in exceptional cases it is permissible for the court to 
consider an appeal by way of case stated in relation to a matter arising at an 
interlocutory stage. He reli es upon the decision of this court in the case of R(on the 
application of Yogesh Par ashar ) v Sunderland Magistrates Court  [2019] EWHC 514  
(Admin); [2019] 2 Cr. App. R. 3 , which was a case concerning the treatment by the 
court of an application to vacate a trial date in advance of the case being heard. A 
point was taken in relation to whether or not it was appropriate for the court to 
consider a challenge to such a decision, prior to the court proceedings being 
ultimately disposed of. The relevant authoritie s were review ed by Bean LJ in a 
passage which was relied upon by Mr Smith : 
“33 Mr Boyd for the CPS relied on what he described as the Buck rule. 
This is a reference to the decision of this court in R v Rochford Justices 
ex parte Buck  (1979) 68 C r. App. R.  114. Lord Widgery CJ cited with 
approval the decision of this court in R v Carden  (1879) 5 QBD 1 . In 
Carden  Cockburn CJ had said that “while we have authority to issue a 
mandamus to hear and determine we have no authority, as it seems to 
me to control the magistrate in the conduct of the case or to prescribe 
to him the evidence which he shall receive or reject as the case may 
be”. 
34 Lord Widgery CJ said that there was an obligation on this court “to 
keep out of the way until the magistrate had finished his  
determination” and that “there was no jurisdiction in this court to 
interfere  with the justice ’s decision , that not having been reached by 
termination of the proceedings below.”

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.   
 
 35 The “Buck  rule” is no longer a rule. More useful guidance is to be 
obtaine d from the judgement of Hughes LJ in this court in R. (Crown 
Prosecution Service)  v Sedgemoor Justices  [2007] EWHC 1803 
(Admin). This was, as the name of the case indicates, an application 
for judicial review by the CPS to challenge a ruling of the justice s that 
the evidence of analysis of the accused ’s blood specimen was 
inadmissible. Hughes LJ said  (at [3]) :- 
“in general terms this court will not entertain, whether by 
application for judicial review or by way of appeal by case stated, an 
interlocutory c hallenge to proceedings in the magistrates court…”  
He added, however  (at [5]) that “it is right to say that this court has 
sometimes been persuaded to consider a case which is at the 
interlocutory stage where there is a powerful reason for doing so.”  
11. Mr Smit h submitted that the observations of Hughes LJ in the Sedgemoor Justices  
case supported his submission , at least by inference,  that there could be cases where 
an application for appeal by way of case stated could be used to challenge an 
interlocutory rulin g by the Magistrates ’ Court. He therefore submitted that there was, 
in principle, jurisdiction for th e court to entertain this appeal, on the basis that the way 
in which the case had been approached by the District Judge amounted to unusual or 
exceptional circumstances justifying proceeding in this way.  
12. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Jarvis submitted that there was no jurisdiction for the 
court to consider an appeal by way of case stated in relation to a criminal matter 
which had yet to be finally determin ed in the Magistrates ’ Court. He relied in 
particular upon the case of Downes v RSPCA  [2017] EWHC 3622 (Admin) ; [2018] 2 
Cr. App. R. 3 , in which Julian Knowles J, having analysed the relevant authorities in 
relation to this issue, reached the following con clusions at paragraph 23 of his 
judgement (with which Holroyd LJ agreed):  
“23. It  seems to me that the relevant principles to be drawn from these 
cases are as follows: ( a) where a jurisdicti onal point is taken before the 
magistrates court, then if the cou rt decline s jurisdiction that decision 
can be challenged either by judicial review or by way of case stated… 
(b) where such a point is taken and they court accepts that it has 
jurisdiction then there is nothing in Streames  to suggest that the 
magistrates c ourt has the power to state a case. The only remedy is for 
the aggrieved party to seek judicial review, and the magistrates in such 
an event should not adjourn unless there are particularly good reasons 
to do so. It will very usually be better to carry on and complete the 
case, allowing for all matters to be raised on appeal at the conclusion 
of the case in the normal way ; and  (c) in all other cases there is no 
power to state a case in relation to an interlocutory ruling. A magistrate 
should proceed to dete rmine the case finally and then to state a case if 
appropriate to do so. In a “special case” (the words used in Streames ) 
and if the defendant has obtained leave to seek judicial review then the 
magistrates might consider adjourning.  
…

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.   
 
 30. In so far as the  appellants suggest that we should circumvent the 
jurisdictional issue by treating this appeal as a rolled -up application for 
permission to seek judicial review, it would not be proper to do so in 
my judgement and Mr Hardy in the end did not press the poin t. The 
starting point is that as Streames  makes clear, the onus is on the 
defendants  to suggest what good reasons there are for seeking judicial 
review. No, or no sufficient, reasons have been advanced.  
31. Secondly, the defendants  chose to commence this a ppeal by way of 
case stated despite the very considerable jurisdictional bar which 
obviously lay in their way, which they wholly failed to grapple with in 
their skeleton argument. It is not for this court to fashion a solution for 
them.  
32. Thirdly, if the  consequences of our allowing an application for 
judicial review were that the case before the District Judge would be 
finished once and for all, then I for my part could see some attraction 
in allowing the application to proceed. But that would not be the  
outcome because, as I have said, there are other in -time charges which 
will have to be determined on the merits in any event. Thus there may 
be issues of cross -admissibility or other evidential reasons why it 
might be undesirable for us to start adjudicat ing at this stage as an 
exercise of discretion by judicial review.  
33. For all of these reasons, had we been invited to do so I would 
decline to treat this application as a rolled -up application for 
permission to seek judicial review of the District Judge’ s ruling.”  
13. Mr Jarvis also drew attention to the recent case of  Highbury Poultry Produce Limited 
v CPS  [2018] EWHC 3122  (Admin) , in which having reviewed the authorities, this 
court concluded, following Downes , that there was no jurisdiction to entertain an  
appeal by way of case stated in relation to an interlocutory matter, but that in the 
circumstances of that case it was appropriate to proceed by way of judicial review.  
14. In the light of the authorities it is clear to me that there is no jurisdiction for t his court 
to consider this case as an appeal by way of case stated, on the basis that it relates to a 
challenge to an interlocutory or preliminary issue brought by a defendant whose case 
has yet to be finally determined. There are sound practical reasons f or awaiting the 
conclusion of the proceedings in the Magistrates ’ Court prior to this court addressing 
a defendant’s contentions in relation to an adverse preliminary or interlocutory by 
way of an appeal by case stated.  For instance, the defendant may, in  the result, be 
acquitted. I do not consider that this approach is inconsistent with the observation 
made by Hughes LJ in Sedgemoor Justices . In that remark he was capturing in 
summary all the circumstances in which an appeal by way of case stated might ar ise, 
including by the prosecution in relation to an interlocutory decision which effectively 
becomes a terminating ruling. What he said does not, however, assist the appellant in 
the present case.  
15. As the authorities demonstrate, this is not an end of the m atter in relation to 
jurisdiction and it is open to the court in appropriate cases to convert the case as an 
application for judicial review, treat  this hearing as a rolled -up hearing  of the

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.   
 
 application for permission to apply for judicial review and if pe rmission is granted, 
the substantive hearing . On behalf of the prosecution, Mr Jarvis objected to this 
course. He pointed out that although there had been an indication of a guilty plea 
before the Magistrates Court, and the District Judge considered that a  community 
sentence would be appropriate, there was no guarantee that the appellant would in fact 
plead guilty .  Som eone in the position of the appellant could wrong -foot the 
prosecution, by returning to court many months after the interlocutory ruling was  
given  and an unsuccessful application to this court had been made and chang e their 
mind in relation to their plea, potentially putting the prosecution in evidential 
difficulties. In my view there is considerable force in this submission, and the court 
should exercise considerable caution before exercising the discretion to convert an 
appeal by way of case stated in relation to an interlocutory matter into a judicial 
review. The practical difficulties and potential prejudice which could arise may well 
be co nsiderable, and significantly outweigh any justification for permitting the action 
to continue and be resolved as a judicial review: see , for instance,  Downes  at 
paragraph 32.   
16. Faced with these submissions, and following an enquiry by the court, the appell ant 
has submitted an undertaking to the court that, in the event of his case being 
unsuccessful and the matter being returned to the Magistrates Court, he will enter a 
guilty plea. In my view this adds a further consideration in relation to the question of  
whether, i n the present case , there is good reason to permit this appeal to be converted 
into an application for judicial review.  I have reached the conclusion that it would be 
permissible in the particular circumstances of the present case for it to be p ermitted to 
continue as a judicial review, albeit this is an unusual course to adopt. My reasons are 
as follows.  Unlike Downes , the point that is taken in this case will effectively resolve 
these proceedings one way or the other , in particular in the light  of the undertaking 
which has been given in relation to the entering of a guilty plea, which effectively 
obviates the concerns about the appellant changing his mind about his plea and the 
prosecution being prejudiced . As the District Judge rightly observed , there is a 
practical danger in the circumstances of this case that the appellant may have served a 
community disposal before this appeal might  have  been heard, and therefore there is 
good sense in giving definitive consideration to the single issue upon which the 
appellant’s guilt turn s without any risk of him serving a sentence and then 
subsequently being acquitted. Whilst it is inappropriate for this matter to proceed by 
way of a case stated, it is appropriate for it to be treated as an application for judicial 
review, for permission to be granted, and for it to be heard substantively.  
17. In this case the argument focuse s on the meaning of section 127 (5)(b) of the 2003 
Act, it being accepted that the long -stop time bar in section 127(5)(a) does not arise. 
The appellant contends that the evidence which was sufficient to justify proceedings 
was available to the police well before six months prior to the appellant in fact being 
charged. In particular, Mr Smith stresses that by the time that the appellant was 
interviewed on 18 April 2018 the police had collated all of the evidence necessary to 
make out the charges under the 2003 Act  upon which they relied before the 
Magistrates Court. This material included the witness statements from the 
complainants and the app ellant’s employer about his accessing their systems  which 
were used to prove the case . In reality, the other enquiries which were undertaken 
after the interview did not add materially to the case which the appellant faced. On the 
basis that these were summ ary only offences, which the police were perfectly entitled

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.   
 
 to charge, the appellant submits that the limitation period in section 127(5)(b) has 
been breached in circumstances where the police had sufficient evidence before them 
to be satisfied that charge s should be brought.  
18. The respondent relies upon the contention that the prosecutor for the purposes of 
section 127(5)(b) of the 2003 Act is in this instance the person at the CPS who was 
permitted to authorise the prosecution. This court has previously giv en consideration 
to the question of who is to be taken as being the prosecutor a long with  the time limits 
for bringing a prosecution in relation to very similarly worded legislation contained in 
section 31(1) of the Animal Welfare Act 2006, in the case of Letherbarrow v 
Warwickshire County Council  [2015] EWHC 4820  (Admin) . The court concluded in 
relation to the phrase “the prosecutor thinks is sufficient to justify the proceedings 
comes to his knowledge” that the proper interpretation was that this did not apply to 
any employee of the prosecuting local authority, but only the employee who was 
entrusted to make the decision to prosecute on behalf of the local authority using the 
skill and experience which had led them to be identified as the person to act in that 
capacity , bearing in mind the broad range of considerations which needed to be taken 
into account in determining when a prosecution may be appropriate. Bean LJ 
observed as follows:  
“16 But reference was also made to RSPCA v Johnson  [2009] EWHC 
2702, i n which, as in this case, the prosecution was brought under the 
Animal Welfare Act 2006. In Johnson  this court  (Pill LJ and Rafferty 
J) declined to hold that Donnachie established any principle of law and 
took the view that the prosecutor for the purposes of section 31 was the 
RSPCA’s case manager given responsibility for making the important 
decision of whether to prosecute.  
17 This court held that time did not begin to run just because some 
other employee of the RSPCA may have had prior knowledge of the 
relevant evidence .  At paragraph 33 of his judgement Pill LJ said this : 
“There is no principle of law that knowledge in a prosecutor 
begins immediately any employee of that prosecutor has the 
relevant knowledge, and Donna chie does not establish one. It is 
right that prosecutors are not entitled to shuffle papers between 
office rs or sit on information so as to extend a time limit. There 
is, however, a degree of judgement involved in bringing a 
prosecution, and knowledge, in my judgement, involves an 
opportuni ty for those with appropriate skills to consider whether 
there is sufficient information to justify a prosecution .” 
I agree with those observations of Pill LJ and, in my view, the 
particular terms of section 31(1) strongly support  them . It is an unusual 
time limit provision in that it extends the time limit for prosecution 
potentially well beyond the usual 6 months set out in the Magistrates ’ 
Court Act 1980. It creates a  first alternative, a long stop time limit of 3 
years and a second  alternative, 6 months  beginning with the date on 
which evidence which the prosecutor thinks is sufficient to justify the 
proceedings comes to his knowledge. If the prosecution do nothing at 
all for more than 2 years, then stir themselves and issue summonses

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.   
 
 within 5 months of evidence coming to their knowledge, then they 
would be within the time limit set out in section 31 (1).  
What the section does show is that Parliament expected the 
consideration of a prosecution under this section to be the subject of a 
careful decision. Th e decision which the prosecutor has to make under 
this subsection is not whether there is a prime facie  case but whether 
the evidence is sufficient to justify a prosecution . That will involve, as 
this court said in Davies v Environment Agency (Wales) , a 
consideration of what is in the interests of justice. It will usually 
involve (and certainly in the present case was rightly regarded as 
involving) the opportunity for the defendant to make a statement either 
at interview or, as Mr Lether barrow did, in writi ng by way of 
mitigation. Such further material may show that the defendant ’s animal 
husbandry practices are now improving ; or, conversely, that matters 
are so bad that the authority ought to press on with an application for a 
ban to prevent him from keepin g livestock altogether.  
… 
19 As this court held in the Davies  case, the prosecutor is the Council, 
but the Council does not decide collectively whether evidence is 
sufficient to justify proceedings. Section 31(1)( b) involves the exercise 
of judgement by an  individual, namely (see Johnson ) the individual 
who is given responsibility for making the important decision whether 
to prosecute. Prosecutors are entitled to have a system which lays 
down at what level of seniority this decision is made. In the present 
case, it was laid down that it should be made at the level of Group 
Manager (Trading Standards) and Ms Fa ulkner duly made the decision 
on 5 August 2013. That was not paper pushing, as Pill LJ described it 
in Johnson , it was a proper internal system for hav ing these important 
decisions taken at an appropriate level. ” 
19. This approach was specifically endorsed by Hickinbottom LJ (with whom Kerr J 
agreed) in R v Woodward and ors  [2017] EWHC 1008  (Admin)  at paragraph 23 , in 
particular in sub -paragraph s (iii) and (iv) as follows:  
“(iii) For the purposes of this appeal, an understanding of the nature of 
the decision which the prosecutor is required to make under section 
31(1)(b), as set out by Bean LJ in that passage, is crucial: the relevant 
date is the date upon wh ich the prosecutor considers that, upon the 
available evidence, it is in the public interest to prosecute the 
particular individual or individuals.  That decision needs to be made 
with especial care; and it cannot be avoided or delayed by – to use the 
phrase of Pill LJ in Johnson  (at [33]) – the mere “shuffling of papers”, 
or by information being sat on so as to extend the time limit.  So far as 
substance is concerned, it demands, not merely consideration of 
whether there is a prima facie  case, but whether it is in the public 
interest for such a prosecution to be brought.  That requires 
consideration of, and often investigation into, factors which bear upon 
that issue, for which a prosecutor is entitled to reasonable time, even

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.   
 
 after the primary evidence has  been gathered in, and even after the 
prosecutor has decided that there is or may be a prima facie  criminal 
case against someone or even identified individuals.  That remains 
good law, the relevant passages from both Johnson  and Letherbarrow  
being recently  endorsed by Gross LJ (with whom Andrews J agreed) 
in Riley  at [17].  
(iv) In Lamont -Perkins  at [26], it was said by Wyn Williams J (with 
whom Sir John Thomas PQBD, as he then was, agreed) that the phrase 
“the prosecutor” “applies to anyone who initiates a prosecution under 
the [2006] Act, and not merely those who prosecute under some 
statutory power to prosecute”.  However, in Letherbarrow  at [19], 
Bean LJ considered more particularly who is, for these purposes, “the 
prosecutor”.  His conclusion on that iss ue was, of course, informed by 
what he had said in [17] about the nature of the decision that “the 
prosecutor” is required to make under section 31(1)(b); and he drew 
the well -established distinction between investigators and prosecutors 
in criminal procee dings.   He said this:  
“… [T]he prosecutor is the Council, but the Council does not 
decide collectively whether evidence is sufficient to justify 
proceedings.  Section 31(1)(b) involves the exercise of a 
judgment by an individual, namely… the individual wh o is 
given responsibility for making the important decision 
whether to prosecute.  Prosecutors are entitled to have a 
system which lays down at what level of seniority this 
decision is made…”.  
This was endorsed by Gross LJ in Riley , at [15], where, in a ca se 
indistinguishable from the one before us, he held that those working 
for the FSA were investigators, the prosecutor being the CPS.  Mr 
Glenser conceded that Riley  was binding upon this court; and he 
conceded that the District Judge erred in proceeding o n the basis that, 
for the purposes of section 31, he should consider the date when the 
evidence was in the hands of the FSA.  That concession was well 
made.”  
20. In the case stated by the District Judge he records at paragraph 8 that the police had 
all of the evidence necessary to consider a charge by 6 December 2018. He sets out 
the submissions made on behalf of the appellant and the respondent, which in broad 
terms reflected the submissions made before this court.  Having set out the conclusions 
in the case of  Woodward  the District Judge in the present case stated his conclusions 
as follows:  
“11 The court having considered the submissions made the following 
ruling:  
1 That the DPP’s Guidelines on Charging were guidelines and there 
was no reason why the police wo uld be precluded from seeking CPS 
advice.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.   
 
 2 That the police had not acted unreasonably in seeking charging 
advice.  
3 That there had not been any unreasonable delay in the police 
gathering the evidence and sending it to the Crown Prosecution 
Service.  
4 That the Crown Prosecution Service had considered that evidence 
within one month and authorise d the issue of the requisition . 
5 That for the purposes of the legislation, the prosecutor was the 
Crown Prosecution Service and that the proceedings were issued in 
time.” 
21. The questions which he presents for the consideration of this court in the case stated 
are as follows:  
“12 The court poses the following questions for the High Court:  
1 Was I right in concluding that  for the purposes of the legislation the 
prosecutor  was the Crown  Prosecution Service  
2 That the proceedings were issued in time?”  
22. The term prosecutor is not further defined either in section 127(5) or elsewhere in the 
2003 Act. We have had our attention drawn to the Director’s Guidance on Charging, 
which makes clear that it is possible for the police to charge the offences under 
section 127(1) and (2), essentially on the basis that the offences are summary only. 
That is not, however, an answer to the question as to whether the police were the only 
party wh o could be a prosecutor for the purposes of section 127(5) in the present 
circumstances. It is clear, and not challenged, that the CPS are an organisation who 
were authorised and competent to bring the charges in the present case. There is a 
strong sense i n which that is an end of the matter: given that they are authorised and 
competent to decide that a prosecution should be brought , the CPS undoubtedly fall 
within the definition of the term prosecutor. The certificate makes plain that these 
charges were br ought within the time lim its provided for by section 127 (5). 
23. There is good reason for the terms of the statute enabling more than one organisation, 
if properly authorised, to be capable of charging the offences under this section. 
Firstly, as is pointed ou t by the respondent, the evidence on the file in the present case 
disclosed potential offences with which the appellant could have been charged which 
were triable either way and therefore required a decision by the CPS as to whether or 
not the appellant sh ould be charged with those offences. Potential offences arose 
under the Computer Misuse Act 1990 and the Malicious Communications Act 1988. 
The police would not have had authority to charge those matters. The need to take a 
broader view of the potential ov erall offending, and give consideration to matters 
which the police could not charge, supports the approach set out above in relation to 
the term prosecutor. Further, there may be cases in which the particular expertise of 
the CPS is required to resolve co mplex evidential issues which would justify their 
involvement in the question of whether or not a suspect should be charged. It is 
inappropriate to interpret the legislation so as to restrict the term prosecutor in the way

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.   
 
 contemplated by the appellant. Fo r the reasons given, that approach is far too narrow 
and does not properly reflect the language of the statute.  In short, for the purposes of 
this legislation the person who initiates the prosecution and brings the charges with 
authority to do so is the pr osecutor.  
24. It was submitted by Mr Smith that this approach would lead to potentially lengthy 
delays with investigations hanging over the head of an individual without charges 
being brought. He also contended that it would lead to potential abuse, with the p olice 
passing a file to the CPS simply for the purpose of avoiding the application of 
s127(5) (b) in circumstances where they had been in possession of the necessary 
evidence to justify a charge for more than 6 months. In relation to the first point, it is 
in my view clear that this is simply a feature of the way in which Parliament 
deliberately drew together the statutory time limits for these offences and does not 
justify any different approach to the one taken above : see Letherbarrow  at paragraph 
17 above . In relation to the second point, it may be possible to conceive of cases 
where arguments in relation to abuse of process could arise and provide a remedy. 
Such cases will be rare and depend on their particular facts, but this is not one of 
them.  
25. Having e xamined the issues raised in this application were the matter being dealt with 
as an appeal by way of case stated both of the questions raised by the District Judge 
would have been answered in the affirmative. In the event, and treating the matter as 
an ap plication for judicial review, the appropriate outcome in this case is that the 
application should be dismissed.  
Lord Justice Dingemans  
26. I agree.  As appears from the judgement of Mr Justice Dove this case could not 
proceed by way of appeal by case stated o n behalf of the appellant, because he had 
not yet been convicted.  I also agree that in the particular circumstances of this case, 
which include the fact that it was clear that the appellant would be convicted, on his 
own plea of guilty, when the matter re turns to the Magistrates’ Court, that this Court 
should determine the substantive question of whether the proceedings were brought in 
time as a claim brought by way of judicial review.  
27. This is possible because there is jurisdiction in this court to enterta in challenges to 
interlocutory decisions of the Magistrates by way of proceedings for judicial review, 
as appears from CPS v Sedgemoor Justices .  However although there is jurisdiction to 
entertain such challenges I agree with Hughes LJ’s statement in CPS v Sedgemoor 
Justices that there will need to be a “powerful reason ” to entertain such a challenge.  
That is because proceedings in the Magistrates’ Court are summary and intended to be 
speedy.  Challenges to interlocutory rulings will increase cost and del ay, and should 
be avoided  without a powerful reason .