WARNING: reporting restrictions apply to the contents transcribed in this document, as stated in

paragraph 2 pf the judgment, because the case involves allegations of sexual offences information to

the public or any section of the public, in writing, in a broadcast or by means of the internet, including

social media. Anyone who receives a copy of this transcript is responsible in law for making sure that

applicable restrictions are not breached. A person who breaches a reporting restriction is liable to a

fine and/or imprisonment. For guidance on whether reporting restrictions apply, and to what

information, ask at the court office or take legal advice.

This Transcript is Crown Copyright. It may not be reproduced in whole or in part other than in

accordance with relevant licence or with the express consent of the Authority. All rights are reserved.

IN THE COURT MARTIAL

APPEAL COURT

Case No: 2023/03882/B3

[2023] EWCA Crim 1625

Royal Courts of Justice

The Strand

London

WC2A 2LL

Wednesday 20 th December 2023

B e f o r e:

VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL, CRIMINAL DIVISION

(Lord Justice Holroyde)

MRS JUSTICE CHEEMA- GRUBB DBE

MR JUSTICE SWIFT

____________________

R E X

- v -

MUHAMMAD TARIQ BHOYROO

____________________

Computer Aided Transcription of Epiq Europe Ltd,

Lower Ground, 18-22 Furnival Street, London EC4A 1JS

Tel No: 020 7404 1400; Email: rcj@epiqglobal.co.uk (Official Shorthand Writers to the Court)

_____________________

Mr J Hugheston-Roberts and Mr J Kwong appeared on behalf of the Applicant

Commodore J Farrant appeared on behalf of the Service Prosecution Authority

Mr M Bolt appeared on behalf of the Intervenor, the Court Administration Officer

____________________

J U D G M E N T

(Approved)

____________________

2

Wednesday 20 th December 2023

LORD JUSTICE HOLROYDE:

1. The applicant faces trial before a Court Martial on 11 charges alleging controlling or

coercive behaviour and offences of sexual and physical violence against his former partner, a

woman to whom we shall refer as "C". He seeks an extension of time in which to apply for

leave to appeal against a ruling made by Judge Advocate Legard in preliminary proceedings

on 19th September 2023. The applications have been referred to the full court by the

Registrar.

2. C is entitled to the lifelong protection of the provisions of the Sexual Offences

(Amendment) Act 1992. Accordingly, during her lifetime no matter may be included in any

publication if it is likely to lead members of the public to identify her as the victim of the

alleged offences.

3. We shall consider at the conclusion of this hearing whether any further reporting

restriction is necessary.

4. We need not go into any detail about the facts giving rise to the charges. For present

purposes it is sufficient to note that each of the charges alleges an offence contrary to section

42 of the Armed Forces Act 2007, of committing an offence contrary to the relevant statutory

provisions.

5. All of the offences are alleged to have been committed during a period of about two years

between 1st March 2018 and 31st March 2020. Throughout that period both the applicant and

C were serving in the armed forces and were accordingly persons subject to Service law.

Most of the alleged offences are said to have occurred when they were off duty, and it is not

3

suggested that the relevant events had any adverse operational effect on the Service.

Moreover, C left the Service in about April 2022, and the applicant was discharged from the

Service in June 2023. In those circumstances the applicant contends that the Court Martial

Board which tries him should be composed of civilian members, rather than military officers.

6. It is necessary to summarise features of the procedural chronology, all of which occurred

during 2023. On 18th May the Service Prosecuting Authority directed that the applicant be

tried by a Court Martial on the 11 charges. We understand that, the decision having been

made on behalf of the Director of Service Prosecutions to lay those charges, the charges

themselves were served upon the applicant by his Commanding Officer, together with an

indication that he would be required to surrender at a place and time to be notified to him.

7. On 12th June the applicant was, as we have said, discharged from the Service. On 23rd

June, a plea and trial preparation hearing took place, but was adjourned without the applicant

having been arraigned.

8. On 28th August, the applicant made a written submission to the court, stating the reasons

why he contended that he should be tried by a civilian Board. It was not suggested that the

charges should be tried in a civilian court. It was submitted that, although a serving member

of the Regular Forces at the time of the relevant events, the applicant had become an ex-

serviceman by the time the proceedings against him commenced. It was further submitted

that the charges were essentially domestic in nature, that there were no operational reasons

why the Board should include military officers, and that there would be an appearance of bias

if a civilian under Service law was tried by a Board comprising military officers.

9. On those grounds, the applicant applied to Judge Advocate Legard for an order pursuant to

Rule 49(2)(c) of the Armed Forces (Court Martial) Rules 2009, giving a direction to the

4

Court Administration Officer that the lay members should all be civilians.

10. A further case management hearing was held on 12th September. It was adjourned,

without arraignment of the applicant, to await the Judge Advocate's ruling on the written

application. The Judge Advocate gave a preliminary indication that if the law permitted him

to do so, he was minded to grant that application. He further indicated that he was

unpersuaded by the submissions as to apparent bias. A number of directions were given,

including as to further written submissions on both sides on the issue on the composition of

the Board.

11. In compliance with those directions, on 15th September the respondent lodged a skeleton

argument indicating that if the applicant was entitled in law to make his application, the

respondent did not oppose it.

12. The applicant later lodged a written response to those submissions; but before he had

done so the Judge Advocate, overlooking the timetable set in the directions which had been

given, issued a written ruling, dated 19th September. Having considered the relevant statutory

provisions, he felt that he had no power to direct the Court Administration Officer ("CAO")

to specify a civilian-only Board. That, he ruled, was a matter for the CAO. The Judge

Advocate therefore dismissed the application. He found that it was unnecessary for him to

determine the issue of when the proceedings commenced.

13. The applicant subsequently made a written request to the CAO for the Court Martial

Board to be composed solely of civilians. That request was refused. The CAO's decision

cannot be, and is not, the subject of this application.

14. In early November the applicant lodged a Notice of Appeal to this court against the

5

Judge Advocate's ruling of 19th September. Rule 50 of the Armed Forces (Court Martial)

Rules 2009 gives this court power to hear an appeal against any order or ruling made by the

Court Martial in preliminary proceedings. However, the Notice of Appeal was filed 50 days

after the time limited for doing so had expired. Having considered the explanations given for

the delay, we grant the applicant the necessary extension of time.

15. The applicant was arraigned at a further case management hearing on 30th November. He

pleaded not guilty to all charges. His trial is currently fixed for hearing on 8th January 2024.

16. Mr Hugheston-Roberts and Mr Kwong submit on behalf of the applicant that the Judge

Advocate fell into error in ruling that he had no power to direct the CAO to specify a Court

Martial Board composed solely of civilians.

17. The Grounds of Appeal invite this court to consider three questions:

(1) Do Judge Advocates have the power to rule on the constitution of the

Board in general?

(2) What is the proper interpretation of "commencement of proceedings"

under Rule 33(5) of the Armed Forces (Court Martial) Rules 2009?

(3) Did the Judge Advocate have the power to order a purely civilian board

for the Court Martial of the applicant?

18. In his oral submissions, Mr Hugheston-Roberts has helpfully confirmed that no challenge

is now made to the decision of the Judge Advocate rejecting the submissions of apparent bias.

6

19. The appeal is opposed by Commodore Farrant on behalf of the respondent.

20. Written submissions have also been made on behalf of the CAO, who seeks leave to

intervene in this appeal. Like the Court of Appeal Criminal Division, this court has an

inherent jurisdiction to regulate its own procedure, which extends to a power to receive

written or oral submissions from an intervenor. Guidance helpfully issued by the Registrar in

July 2020 rightly makes clear that the court will rarely permit intervention. We are, however,

persuaded that in the circumstances of this case the written submissions of the CAO will

assist the court to have a fuller understanding of the issues. We therefore agree to consider

those written submissions and to take them into account in reaching our decision.

21. The Grounds of Appeal and the written and oral submissions of all counsel, for which we

are grateful, require us to consider a number of issues. We begin by setting out the statutory

framework. Part 5, Chapter 2 of the Armed Forces Act 2006 contains provisions relating to

the powers of a Commanding Officer in certain circumstances to charge a person with a

Service offence which may be tried summarily, and the power of the Director of Service

Prosecutions to charge, or to direct the bringing of charges, in cases which have been referred

to him.

22. Part 7 of the 2006 Act contains provisions relating to trial by the Court Martial.

Importantly for present purposes, this part of the Act includes section 155 which, so far as

material, states:

"155 Constitution of the Court Martial

(1) In the case of any proceedings, the Court Martial is to

consist of —

(a) a judge advocate; and

7

(b) three or, in the case of proceedings of a

prescribed description, six other persons

('lay members').

(2) But Court Martial rules may provide that, in the case of

proceedings of a prescribed description, there are to be —

…

(b) no lay members.

(2A) In the case of proceedings where the number of lay

members would (but for this this subsection) be three, a judge

advocate may, in accordance with Court Martial rules, direct

that the number of lay members is to be four.

(3) In the case of proceedings where the Court Martial consists

of a judge advocate and lay members —

(a) a prescribed number of the lay members

must be officers, warrant officers or OR-7

ranks qualified for membership under

section 156 and not ineligible by virtue of

section 157; and

(b) the rest must be officers so qualified and not

so ineligible.

(4) Subsection (3) is subject to any provision made by Court

Martial rules.

(5) The judge advocate for any proceedings is to be specified

by or on behalf of the Judge Advocate General.

(6) The lay members for any proceedings are to be specified by

or on behalf of the court administration officer.

…"

23. The officers who are qualified for membership of the Court Martial and those who are

ineligible in certain circumstances are defined in sections 156 and 157 of the 2006 Act.

24. Section 363 of the 2006 Act establishes the position of a CAO for the Court Martial to be

appointed by the Defence Council. The role was created as a response to a ruling of the

European Court of Human Rights in Findlay v United Kingdom [1997] 24 EHRR 22, as to a

8

lack of impartiality and independence in the Court Martial. The explanatory notes to the

2006 Act indicate that the CAO "is responsible for administrative matters such as listing

cases and notifying witnesses of hearings". The notes further explain that the power of

appointment of the CAO is vested in the Defence Council in order to "establish his

independence from the chain of command".

25. The Secretary of State is empowered by section 163 of the 2006 Act to make rules with

respect to the Court Martial. For present purposes we focus on the Armed Forces (Court

Martial) Rules 2009. We shall refer to these solely by the numbers of the rules concerned.

26. By Rule 2, so far as material:

"Interpretation: proceedings and parties

2.— (1) Unless otherwise stated, any reference in these Rules

to proceedings includes —

(a) preliminary proceedings,

(b) trial proceedings,

(c) sentencing proceedings,

(d) variation proceedings,

(e) appellate proceedings,

(f) activation proceedings, and

(g) ancillary proceedings,

but does not include the exercise of any power of the court

otherwise than at a hearing.

(2) In these Rules—

…

'preliminary proceedings' means any

proceedings of the court held for the

purpose of arraigning a defendant on a

9

charge or giving directions, orders or

rulings for the purpose of trial proceedings;

…

'trial proceedings' means proceedings for

the trial of a charge by the court (including

proceedings authorised by an order of the

Appeal Court under section 19 of the 1968

Act), and does not include sentencing

proceedings;

…"

27. By Rule 15(1):

"The court administration officer must exercise his functions

(other than that of specifying the lay members for any

proceedings) subject to any direction given by a judge

advocate."

28. Part 4, entitled "Members of the Court", contains provisions as to the circumstances in

which there shall be no lay members of the Court Martial, as to the number and agenda of lay

members required in particular proceedings, and as to persons ineligible to act as lay

members in certain circumstances. Any party to the proceedings may object to any lay

member on any reasonable ground. If such an objection is made to a Judge Advocate and

upheld by him, the Judge Advocate shall discharge the lay member: see Rule 35.

29. As to civilian members of the Court Martial, Rule 33 provides in material part:

"Civilians

33. – (1) For proceedings to which this rule applies, each of the

lay members must be either —

10

(a) a person not subject to service law who is

qualified for membership under paragraph

(2) and not ineligible by virtue of rule 32; or

(b) an officer or warrant officer who would be

qualified for membership under section 156,

and not ineligible by virtue of section 157

or rule 32, if this rule did not apply;

and subsection 155(3) shall not apply in relation to the

proceedings.

(2) For proceedings to which this rule applies, a person not

subject to service law is qualified for membership of the court

unless —

(a) he is aged under 18, or has reached the age

of 70, at the commencement of the

proceedings;

(b) he is not a United Kingdom national;

(c) he is a mentally disordered person;

(d) he is disqualified for jury service;

(e) he is a member of the Military Court

Service; or

(f) he is on the staff of the Service Prosecuting

Authority.

…

(5) This rule applies to —

(a) trial proceedings, if any defendant is not

subject to service law at the commencement

of the proceedings;

…"

30. Purely for convenience, we shall refer to the two categories of person mentioned in Rule

33(1) as "civilians" and "officers" respectively.

31. We have reflected on the detailed submissions which we have received as to the true

meaning of those various provisions. Our conclusions are as follows.

11

32. So far as the constitution of the Court Martial is concerned, the general rule in section

155(1) of the 2006 Act is that in any proceedings the Court Martial will consist of a Judge

Advocate and a number of lay members. That general rule is subject to any provision in the

rules that there are to be no lay members in proceedings of a prescribed description. In the

present case it is common ground that the general rule applies and that accordingly the Court

Martial before which the applicant is tried will include lay members. Where, as in this case,

the Court Martial includes lay members, the general rule in section 155(3) of the Act is that

the lay members shall be officers. That general rule is, however, subject to any provision

made by rules; and relevant provision is made by Rule 33 of the Armed Forces (Court

Martial) Rules 2009. Rule 33 applies to a number of situations in which the accused was not

subject to Service law at the commencement of the proceedings. Where Rule 33 applies,

each of the lay members must be either a person not subject to Service law, who is qualified

for membership and not ineligible, or an officer or warrant officer who is qualified and not

ineligible. By Rule 33(5)(a) the proceedings to which the rule applies include "trial

proceedings if any defendant is not subject to Service law at the commencement of the

proceedings". We draw attention to the fact that the paragraph speaks of "the commencement

of the proceedings", not "the commencement of the trial proceedings", or "the

commencement of those proceedings".

33. Two questions then arise. We must first consider whether this applicant is within the

category of a defendant who is "not subject to Service law at the commencement of the

proceedings". If he is not, then Rule 33 has no application; the general rule in section 155(3)

of the 2006 Act applies, and the lay members must all be officers. If he is, however, then

Rule 33 applies, and the lay members may be civilians or officers, or a mixture of the two.

34. The second question which we would then have to consider is whether the decision as to

12

the composition of the Board of lay members is a decision for the Judge Advocate or for the

CAO.

35. As we have noted, Rule 2 of the 2009 Rules defines references in those rules to

"proceedings" as including various types or stages of proceedings, one of which is trial

proceedings. It is, in our view, clear from the use of the word "includes" that the list in

paragraphs (a) to (g) of that Rule is not exhaustive. Moreover, the only express exclusion

from the meaning of "proceedings" is the exclusion relating to the exercise of any power of

the court otherwise than at a hearing.

36. It follows, in our view, that the focus must be on the ordinary meaning of the word

"proceedings", which is capable of including the whole of the criminal proceedings from the

time when the Director of Service Prosecutions, acting under section 121 of the 2006 Act,

charges or directs the charging of a defendant, and by virtue of section 122 the charge is

allocated for trial in the Court Martial.

37. It further follows that we are unable to accept the submission that the reference in Rule

33(5)(a) to "the commencement of the proceedings" must mean either the preliminary

proceedings hearing at which a defendant is arraigned, or the trial hearing itself. As this case

illustrates, a significant period of time may elapse, and there may be several hearings, before

a defendant is arraigned. There may, in different circumstances, be early hearings at which a

defendant is not present to be arraigned, for example because he has absconded. There may,

for one reason or another, be a lengthy delay before any hearing at all takes place.

38. We can see no reason why it cannot be said that "the proceedings" have commenced

when a defendant's case has been allocated for trial in the Court Martial, but there has not yet

been a hearing, or the defendant has not yet appeared before the Court Martial, or the

13

defendant has not yet been arraigned. Indeed, it seems to us that the contrary interpretation

for which the parties contended gives rise to a substantial risk of arbitrary distinctions being

drawn according to the date when a hearing is first convened.

39. Those reflections lead us to conclude that the proceedings against this applicant

commenced when he was charged on 18th May 2023. He was at that time subject to Service

law. He is not therefore within the category of defendant to whom Rule 33(5)(a) refers. Rule

33 has no application to his case. The general rule in section 155(3) of the 2006 Act applies

and the lay members at his Court Martial must all be officers.

40. We next consider the submissions as to the respective roles of the Judge Advocate and of

the CAO in relation to the constitution of a Court Martial which includes lay members. In

our view, section 155 of the 2006 Act and the provisions of Part 4 of the Rules draw a

distinction between a decision as to the composition of the Board, and the identification of

the individuals who will make up that composition. The former, including decisions as to the

number of lay members and decisions as to whether the lay members must or may include

civilians as well as, or in place of, officers, is a decision for a Judge Advocate to make. The

latter, involving the selection at random of persons included in the relevant Panel or Panels of

prospective lay members is a decision for the CAO.

41. That interpretation is, we think, consistent with the use in section 155(5) and (6) of the

word "specified", which connotes the selection or identification of an individual or

individuals from a particular category. Consistently with the independence of his role, the

CAO is not subject to any direction by a Judge Advocate when performing his function of

specifying the individuals who will make up the appropriate constitution of a Board of lay

members.

14

42. It follows that in a case where the legislation requires there to be lay members but

permits the lay members to be officers, civilians or a mixture of the two, a Judge Advocate

must give a direction as to the category or categories from which the individual members are

to be selected. That direction will be binding on the CAO, who must then specify members

from the category or categories directed by the Judge Advocate. If made in preliminary

proceedings, the Judge Advocate's direction may be appealed, pursuant to Rule 50 of the

2009 Rules. But the specifying of the individual lay members will be a matter exclusively for

the CAO.

43. Drawing these threads together, we conclude:

(1) If Rule 33(5)(a) had applied to this case it would have been necessary for

the Judge Advocate to give a direction as to whether the lay members should

all be civilians or should all be officers, or should be a mixture of civilians and

officers. The Judge Advocate therefore fell into error in deciding that he had

no such power.

(2) However, Rule 33(5(a) did not apply to this case because the applicant

was subject to Service law when the proceedings were commenced.

(3) The lay members must therefore all be officers, to be specified by the

CAO.

44. The essential ruling of the Judge Advocate was that the application to him to direct the

CAO to specify a civilian-only Board failed and was dismissed. Although we have found

that the route by which the Judge Advocate reached that decision was flawed, the decision

itself was correct, because in the circumstances of this case the 2006 Act requires that all the

15

lay members must be officers.

45. We readily accept that the appeal has raised arguable issues. But for the reasons we have

given, there can be no successful appeal. We therefore grant the applicant the necessary

extension of time and grant him leave to appeal, but we dismiss his appal.

46. It will be for the CAO to specify the officers who will be the lay members. We hope it

will be possible for that to be done promptly so that the trial may proceed on its scheduled

date.

(There followed a short discussion on the reporting of the proceedings)

(The court retired to confer)

LORD JUSTICE HOLROYDE:

47. In all the circumstances we are not persuaded that the court has any power to postpone

publication of the judgment. We therefore make no order in that regard under section 4(2) of

the Contempt of Court Act 1981. But nor do we direct expedition in the preparation of the

transcript. The date of the hearing means in practical terms that the transcript is not going to

be prepared and approved by the court before the start of next term, which will be after the

trial has begun – and in all probability after it has ended.

_____________________________________

Epiq Europe Ltd hereby certify that the above is an accurate and complete record of the

proceedings or part thereof.

16

Lower Ground, 18-22 Furnival Street, London EC4A 1JS

Tel No: 020 7404 1400

Email: rcj@epiqglobal.co.uk

______________________________

17