Neutral Citation Number: [2024] EWHC 193 (Admin)  
 
Case No: AC-2023 -CDF -000025  
CO/33/2023  
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE  
KING'S BENCH DIVISION  
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT  
CARDIFF DISTRICT REGISTRY  
 
Cardiff Civil and Family Justice Centre  
2 Park Street  
Cardiff  
CF10 1ET  
Date: 07/02/2024  
 
Before  : 
 
THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY  
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Between :  
 
 JASON NICHOLAS JUUL  Claimant  
 - and -  
 (1) CHIEF CONSTABLE OF DYFED -POWYS 
POLICE  
(2) DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS   
 
Defendant s 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
The Claimant appeared in person by video link  
DAVID MESSLING  (instructed by Dyfed -Powys Police Legal Services ) for the First 
Defendant  
CONNOR EVANS (instructed by  Crown Prosecution Service ) for the Second Defendant   
 
Hearing date: 19 January 2024  
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Approved Judgment  
  
This judgment was handed down remotely at 10.30am on 7 February 2024  by circulation to 
the parties or their representatives by e -mail and by release to the National Archives.

THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY  
Approved Judgment   
 
 MRS JUSTICE FARBEY :   
Introduction  
1. The claimant (who is now aged 54) applies under section 18 of the Serious Crime Act 
2007 and CPR Part 8 for an order discharging a Serious Crime Prevention Order 
(“SCPO”) made by HHJ Richards in the Crown Court at Swansea on 17 May 2022.  
The order replace d a previous SCPO imposed in the Crown Court at Inner London on 
15 June 2016.  The history before then is not easy to ascertain but the documents show 
that the claimant has been subject to SCPOs in one form or another since 8 June 2012.   
2. At a case management hearing before Lane J on 16 October 2023, which all parties 
attended, the claimant appeared in person by video link from Russia.  Lane J granted 
permission to the claimant to attend the substantive hearing before me by video from 
Russi a where he says that he now lives.  Before me, the claimant appeared remotely 
pursuant to Lane J’s directions; Mr David Messling (for the first defendant) and Mr 
Connor Evans (for the second defendant) appeared in court.     
Legal framework  
3. The imposition, variation and discharge of SCPOs is governed by Part 1 of the Serious 
Crime Act 2007 (“the Act”).  The Crown Court has jurisdiction to impose a SCPO in 
relation to a person who has been convicted of having committed a serious offence 
(secti on 19(1)).  The test to be applied is whether the court has “reasonable grounds to 
believe that the order would protect the public by preventing, restricting or disrupting 
involvement by the person in serious crime in England and Wales”  (section 19(2)).   
4. By virtue of section 19(5), the Crown Court may impose:  
“(a)  such prohibitions, restrictions or requirements; and  
(b)  such other terms;  
as the court considers appropriate for the purpose of protecting 
the public by preventing, restricting or disrupting involvement 
by the person concerned in serious crime in England and Wales.”  
5. It is plain from the statutory language that a SCPO is a preventive order whose purpose 
is public protection.  It is not a punishment for past criminal conduct.  Given its 
protective function, the court will undertake a prospective analysis of the risk of future 
crime albeit that past conduct may inform the court’s consideration of future risk.  
6. Section 16 of the Act makes provision for the duration of orders:  
“(1)  A serious crime prevention order must specify when it is to 
come into force and when it is to cease to be in force.  
(2)  An order is not to be in force for more than 5 years beginning 
with the coming into force of the order.”

THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY  
Approved Judgment   
 
 7. If a person breaches its terms, the Crown Court has the power to vary or replace a SCPO 
(section 21(1)).  The test to be applied on variation or replacement involves the same 
considerations as on imposition (see section 21(2)).   
8. Section 24(1) of the Act provides a right of appeal from the Crown Court to the Court 
of Appeal  in the following wide terms:  
“An appeal against a decision of the Crown Court in relation to 
a serious crime prevention order may be made to the Court of 
Appeal by – 
(a)  the person who is the subject of the order; or  
(b)  the relevant applicant authority.”  
9. The powers of the Court of Appeal are contained in secondary legislation.  Article 5 of 
the Serious Crime Act 2007 (Appeals under Section 24) Order 2008/1863 provides:  
“(1)  The Court of Appeal has all the powers of the Crown Court.  
(2)  The Court of Appeal may — 
(a)  make a serious crime prevention order;  
(b)  affirm, set aside or vary any order or judgment made or given 
by the Crown Court;  
(c)  refer any issue for determination by the Crown Court;  
(d)  order a new hearing in the Crown Court;  
(e)  make an order for costs in accordance with Part 3;  
(f)  make an order for the payment of interest on those costs.  
(3)  The Court of Appeal may exercise its powers in relation to 
the whole or part of an order of the Crown Court.”  
10. The width of the language both in primary and secondary legislation is apt to include 
an appeal not only against the making of an order but also against the requirements of 
an order and its duration.    
11. Subject to an irrelevant exception, an appeal under section 24(1) lies only with the leave 
of the Court of Appeal (section 24(3)).   
12. A person who without “reasonable excuse” fails to comply with a SCPO commits an 
offence punishable by up to five years’ imprisonment (section 25).    
13. As for the jurisdiction of the High Court, section 18 of the Act provides in so far as 
relevant:  
“(1)  On an application under this section –

THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY  
Approved Judgment   
 
 (a)   the High Court in England and Wales may discharge a 
serious crime prevention order in England and Wales…  
… 
(2)  An application for the discharge of an order may be made 
by– 
… 
(b)  subject as follows – 
(i)  the person who is the subject of the order…  
(3)  The court must not entertain an application by the person 
who is the subject of the order unless it considers that there has 
been a change of circumstances affecting the order …” 
(emphasis added).  
14. CPR PD  77 para 3.1 deals with applications to discharge a SCPO and provides in so far 
as relevant:  
“The…claim form must contain — 
(1) where the applicant is the person who is the subject of the 
SCPO, details of the change of circumstances affecting the 
SCPO…”  
15. Proceedings before the High Court in relation to SCPOs are civil proceedings.  The 
standard of proof to be applied by the court is the civil standard (section 35 of the Act). 
In considering the facts, I shall therefore apply the balance of probabilities.   
Factual background  
16. I did not hear oral evidence.  I take the facts from the documents before me.  The 
claimant has forty -two criminal convictions dating back to 1986.  Of those convictions, 
twenty relate to offences of dishonesty such as fraud and theft.   
17. On 24 February 2012, the claimant pleaded guilty in the Crown Court at Southwark to 
one count of conspiracy to defraud.  He was sentenced to 81 months’ imprisonment and 
made the subject of ancillary orders including a SCPO.  The facts of the 2012 offence 
are summarised in R v Jason Place  [2017] EWCA Crim 884 which (despite the use of 
an alias) relates to the claimant.  The judgment conveniently describes the 2012 offence 
as follows:       
“It was identity theft or fraud on what was described as an 
industrial scale between September 2003 and June 2009. The 
judge described him as the mastermind behind a scheme 
which used careful planning and sophisticated modern IT . 
The false documents were high quality, created and used to steal 
identities or create fictitious people. A package was sold to

THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY  
Approved Judgment   
 
 fraudsters who used them to support loan applications, for 
example” (emphasis added).   
18. The claimant continued to offend.  On 10 January 2013, in Westminster Magistrates’ 
Court, he was convicted of fraud.  On 15 December 2015, across two indictments, he 
was convicted of fraud, stalking and fifteen counts of failing to comply with his SCPO.  
The judgment in R v Jason Place  describes the stalking offence as follows:  
“7….On 2nd April 2014, [a barrister] told police of an internet 
harassment campaign by the use of two websites, 
cowboysolicitors.com and bentasianlawyers.com.au. 
Cowboysolicitors was registered in the name Gary Wilson, the 
applicant's brother. Bentasianlaw yers was registered to 
Garyninjatech, an email address the applicant had used.  
8.  The attack began on 27th March 2014 with malicious and 
derogatory emails to lawyers and barristers, links to websites 
supplied. It was timed to coincide with an AGM of the Society 
of Asian Lawyers to which [the barrister] sought election as 
Chairman. T he attacks suggested he was corrupt, had rewarded 
a solicitor for work supplied, a false petition sought his 
disbarment and a fake item in the format of Sky News appeared 
to report his arrest. He was accused of plagiarism.  
9.  The Crown's case was that the applicant was responsible for 
a course of conduct which amounted to stalking…The defence 
was that the applicant, who gave evidence, had nothing to do 
with the material, did not know [the barrister] and that his brother 
Gary Wilson was Garyninjatech. Wilson and Patrick Connor had 
access to the applicant's laptops…  
12.  The judge said this was a course of internet bullying and 
harassment. Considering R v Liddle and Hayes  [1999] 3 All ER 
816 CA he found the offence serious, the offending persistent, 
sophisticated and made up of malicious allegations designed to 
do damage and to hurt. [The barrister], worn down, hired private 
investigators. There was no remorse. The applica nt denied 
responsibility and blamed his brother and another. He was 
intelligent and resourceful. Aggravating the matter were his 
previous convictions  and that the offences were committed 
whilst he was on licence.”  
19. The court made a five -year SCPO to start from the date of the claimant’s release from 
the custodial part of his sentence.  The claimant was released on 24 August 2018 so that 
the SCPO was due to expire on 23 August 2023.  
20. The claimant’s licence expiry date was 23 February 2021.  On that date, he became free 
to leave the United Kingdom provided that he complied with his obligation under the 
SCPO to notify the relevant authorities of his address.  The claimant says that in Ap ril 
2021, he began an online relationship with his now wife who is a citizen of the Republic 
of Belarus.  He began to travel between the United Kingdom and Belarus.

THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY  
Approved Judgment   
 
 21. In around July 2021, the claimant relocated from Kent to his brother’s address in Burry 
Port, West Wales.  On 19 August 2021, the management of his SCPO was transferred 
from the Kent Police to the first defendant to reflect this change of address.  The pol ice 
officer tasked with managing the order on behalf of the first defendant is DC Danielle 
Evans.  The claimant does not trust DC Evans and has levelled some serious criticisms 
at her.  Among other things, he has launched proceedings against her for contem pt of 
court.  I do not need to determine whether or not the claimant’s criticisms are well -
founded; nor are the contempt proceedings before me.     
22. On 1 October 2021, the claimant married his now wife at the Central Minsk Registry.  
An untranslated copy of what is said to be the marriage certificate has been produced.   
23. On 7 January 2022, in the Crown Court at Swansea, the claimant pleaded guilty to nine 
offences of breach of his SCPO.  On 11 March 2022, he was sentenced by HHJ Richards 
to 12 months’ imprisonment on each count to run concurrently.  
24. In a witness statement dated 21 March 2022, the claimant said:  
“I live at my brother’s address at…Burry Port…when I live in 
the United Kingdom.  I also reside with my wife permanently in 
the Republic of Belarus.”  
25. By written application dated 10 May 2022, the prosecution applied for a SCPO.  The 
application states:  
“[The claimant] can be regarded as a prolific fraudster and 
cybercriminal who ran a ‘confidential access’ business, selling 
fraudulent identities to other serious criminals and obtaining a 
financial benefit from further criminal activities these identities 
were able to facilitate.”  
26. In his written submissions in the Crown Court opposing a SCPO, the claimant (who 
represented himself) stated unequivocally that he lived in Belarus with his wife.  Any 
SCPO would not be enforceable and would be a disproportionate interference with his 
huma n rights.   
27. On 17 May 2022, the judge made a SCPO for a period of five years beginning with the 
date on which the claimant was released from prison.  It replaced the 2016 order.   
28. I have been provided with a transcript of the judge’s ruling.  She held:  
“The test is whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that 
the terms of the order would protect the public by preventing, 
restricting or disrupting involvement by the Defendant in serious 
crime in England and Wales. I bear in mind that I am having to 
consider future risk  and whether there is a real or significant 
risk, not just a bare possibility.  
… 
The Defendant maintains that I should not make an order as he 
lives in Belarus, he also asserts in another statement before the

THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY  
Approved Judgment   
 
 Court that he lives in South Wales, he maintains he lives in both 
countries. I have considered the terms of the proposed Serious 
Crime Prevention Order, with one exception to which I will 
return, I am satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe 
that the order would protect the public by preventing, restricting 
or disrupting involvement by the Defendant in serious crime in 
England and Wales. I do not consider that Paragraph 3.4 is 
necessary to protect the public…The order already requires 
the Defe ndant to notify the police of premises within and 
outside the United Kingdom, in which he resides  or operates 
as a business premises, the Defendant knows the consequences 
if he acts in breach of the order” (emphasis added).   
I should explain that Paragraph 3.4 (mentioned by the judge) would have required the 
claimant to notify the relevant authorities in advance of any foreign travel.   
29. The claimant was released from prison on 1 June 2022 so that the SCPO will come to 
an end in 2027.  His licence expiry date was 3 December 2022 which was also his 
sentence expiry date.   
30. On 12 June 2022, the claimant was recalled to prison on the grounds that he had 
attempted to leave the United Kingdom by ferry in breach of his licence conditions.  
Those conditions did not contain a prohibition on travel per se.  Following the 
claimant’s use of complaints procedures, the police removed an erroneous travel 
restriction marker from his police record.  He was however obliged under the terms of 
his licence to obtain the permission of his supervising Probation Officer before 
travelling out of th e United Kingdom.  The Parole Board did not consider his recall and 
so did not consider whether he had breached his licence.  He remained in custody until 
his release on 2 December 2022 which was (inexplicably) a day before his sentence 
expired.     
31. On 5 December 2022, as part of his post -sentence supervision, the claimant underwent 
an interview with the Probation Service and sent the first defendant an email under 
clause 3 of the SCPO in which he provided two residential addresses.  The first address  
was in Burry Port.  The second address was in Minsk.   
32. According to the claim form, the claimant left the United Kingdom on 9 December 
2022.  He does not appear to have returned since then.  On 16 December 2022, he sent 
the Probation Service an email in which he claimed to have been receiving death threats 
such that he had left the United Kingdom permanently and had no intention of returning.   
On the same day, he informed the Probation Service that he was residing in Belarus.   
33. The present claim was lodged in January 2023.   An email from the claimant to the first 
defendant dated 19 January 2023 indicates that he moved from Minsk to Tyumenskaya 
oblast in Russia in that month.  In an application to amend his statement of case, dat ed 
23 January 2023, the claimant said that he was living permanently in Russia.   
34. On 8 February 2023, in his response to the first defendant’s summary grounds of 
resistance, the claimant stated that he now lived permanently in the Russian Federation 
and gave the address in Tyumenskaya oblast.  The claimant’s skeleton argument (dated 
31 March 2023) is posited on his residence in Russia.

THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY  
Approved Judgment   
 
 35. In his witness statement dated 27 November 2023, the claimant provided the address in 
Tyumenskaya oblast but then stated that he was “currently” residing in Belarus with his 
wife.  In an Affidavit dated 28 November 2023, the claimant provided the Tyumenska ya 
oblast address.   
36. The claimant’s post -sentence supervision period expired on 4 June 2023.  I confirmed 
with the parties during the course of the hearing that the only restrictions presently upon 
him are those imposed by the SCPO.   
The SCPO  
37. The terms of the SCPO are lengthy and detailed.  It would be laborious to set them out 
here, but I have considered them in full.  They concern restrictions on, and notification 
to the relevant authorities of, communication devices (phones and laptops); res trictions 
on email accounts; notification of using certain postal services and virtual offices; and 
restrictions on, and notification of, the acquisition of web domains and servers.   
38. In relation to where the claimant lives, clauses 3 and 7 of the SCPO provide as follows:  
“3 Notification of Premises/Travel both within and outside the 
UK 
3.1 On the date of the coming into force of this Order, the 
Offender shall notify the [relevant authorities] of the full postal 
addresses and any postal codes of all premises, including 
business premises, which he may own, possess the keys to, 
occupy (whet her as a tenant or not) or control, specifying in that 
notice which of the premises is his home address.  
3.2 During the operation of this Order, the Offender shall notify 
the [relevant authorities] in writing immediately of the full postal 
addresses and any postal codes of any premises, including 
business premises, which he may acquire, possess the keys to, 
occupy (whether as a tenant or not) or control, specifying in that 
notice which of the premises is his home address.  
3.3  For the purposes of this Order premises includes, but is not 
limited to, caravans, hotels, garages, outbuildings, allotments, 
garden buildings and sheds.  
… 
7 Notification of changes related to the Order  
7.1 Save for as stipulated above, the Offender must send written 
notice informing [the relevant authorities]  of any changes related 
to this Order within 7 days. Such changes include: (i) any change 
of any of his names; (ii) any change of his home address; (iii) his 
acquisition of a temporary address ; and (iv) any change of his 
temporary address or his ceasing to have one.

THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY  
Approved Judgment   
 
 7.2 In the case of a change of a name or address or the acquisition 
of a temporary address, the Offender must specify the new name 
or address.”  
39. As the claimant has emphasised in his written and oral submissions, there is no 
prohibition on foreign travel.  He is not prohibited from living in Belarus or Russia: he 
will comply with the SCPO provided that he gives the required notifications as set out  
in clauses 3 and 7.   
40. Although I have not been provided with a transcript of the parties’ submissions before 
the judge, the claimant accepts that he submitted to her that the SCPO was 
unenforceable given his permanent residence in Belarus.  The claimant says that the 
judge acce pted that he lived in Belarus and so refused, on human rights grounds, to 
make any travel restrictions.  As I have indicated, the draft SCPO submitted to the 
Crown Court contained a requirement to notify the relevant authorities before 
undertaking any fore ign travel.  I accept that the judge deleted this part of the draft order 
on account of the claimant’s residency, meaning the place where he would reside after 
his release from the custodial part of his sentence.       
41. By notice of appeal dated 27 May 2022, the claimant applied to the Court of Appeal for 
leave to appeal against the SCPO, seeking its discharge.  In his grounds of appeal, the 
claimant told the court that he was married to a Belarus citizen and that he was himself 
a resident of Belarus.  He contended (among other things) that the SCPO had “no value 
if the offender lives outside the UK jurisdiction.”  He emphasised that the order had 
been in existence for 10 years.  He submitted that, during that period, he h ad not 
committed any further serious crime and that it was disproportionate for the SCPO to 
continue merely as a consequence of breaches of its provisions.  The SCPO was 
unworkable and breached his human rights.   
42. In supplementary correspondence to the Court of Appeal, the claimant pointed out that 
he would be nearly 60 years old at the expiration of the SCPO and that people change 
over time.  He said that he had established a new life in Belarus.  He described vari ous 
ways in which he said that his SCPO had been poorly managed.  He said:  
“I am not going to live in the UK upon my release from prison 
in December 2022. I have a home. I have a wife in the Republic 
of Belarus. I am emigrating from this country, I am prepared to 
renounce my citizenship in the pursuit of happiness. How is the 
SCPO going to be monitored in Belarus? Am I going to be 
arrested for alleged breaches every time I return to the UK? Do 
I have to live in exile for the rest of my life from this terrible 
burden of an SCPO…?”  
43. On 2 September 2022, the Single Judge (McGowan J) refused leave to appeal on the 
papers. On 4 November 2022, the claimant abandoned his appeal which was not, 
therefore, the subject of any judgment by the full court.  The claimant says that he 
abandoned the  appeal on pragmatic grounds as he was serving a short sentence and as 
he had no access to legal advice in the difficult conditions of the Covid -19 pandemic.

THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY  
Approved Judgment   
 
 The claim and the defendants’ responses  
44. The claimant submits in his claim form and in his written and oral submissions that 
there has been a change of circumstances since the judge imposed the SCPO in May 
2022.  At the time of the hearing before the judge, he was in custody and so within the 
United Kingdom.  Prior to his imprisonment, he was travelling back and forth between 
the United Kingdom and Belarus.  The judge could not be expected to know whether 
he would actually move to Belarus or remain in the United Kingdom upon his release.  
Since hi s release, he has left the UK on a permanent basis, relocating first to Belarus 
and more recently to the Russian Federation.   
45. In support of this submission, the claimant relies on a copy of Lithuanian stamps on his 
passport to demonstrate that he went by land from Lithuania to Belarus on 9 December 
2022.  He relies on a copy of his Belarus residence permit which was issued on 30 
October 2021 and expired on 30 July 2022.  He asserts (without producing independent 
evidence) that his residence permit will be renewed and that a Belarus residence 
document means that he can live in Russia.  His wife can sponsor his family members 
to vis it him in Belarus or Russia, so that he has no need to return to the United Kingdom 
to maintain his family life.   He has no need to return to the United Kingdom at all.        
46. The claimant submits that, in light of this change of circumstances, the operation of the 
SCPO cannot be monitored and is therefore ineffective.  It is unenforceable, as the 
jurisdiction to enforce it does not extend abroad ( R v (KBR Inc) v Director of the Serious 
Fraud Office  [2021] UKSC 2, [2022] A.C. 519, paras 21 -22).  The claimant submits 
that the ineffective and unenforceable nature of the SCPO means that it cannot serve 
the purpose of the 2007 Act which is to protect the public.     
47. The claimant submits that the passing of time represents a further or alternative change 
of circumstances.  It is now over a decade since he has been convicted of the sort of 
serious crime that would justify the making of a SCPO.  His more recent convictio ns 
relate to breaches of the SCPO which are not “serious” offences in the sense required 
(see section 2 of the Act).  He has accrued no further criminal convictions since the 
proceedings in Swansea Crown Court.  In these circumstances, the connection betwe en 
the reduction of serious crime and the stringent provisions of the SCPO is now tenuous 
and increasingly vanishing.   In the meantime, he has transformed his life.  He is married 
with every disincentive to avoid offending in Russia.  His offending is a t hing of the 
past.    
48. The claimant submits that, in the changed circumstances, the SCPO has become a 
punitive and not a protective measure, contrary to the purpose s of the Act.  The SCPO 
is unjustified and unlawful not only under the Act but also under the protection afforded 
to basic rights by the common law (including Magna Carta) and under the Human 
Rights Act 1998.  In terms of his human rights, he relies princip ally on article 8 of the 
European Convention on Human Rights which provides a qualified right to respect for 
priva te and family life.   He relies on the right to respect for private life because the 
requirements of the SCPO are intrusive.  In relation to family life, the claimant makes 
the broad assertion that the SCPO has generated undue strains on familial relations hips.  
The only particularised example is that the SCPO has generated undue intrusion into 
his brother’s life because the relevant authorities treat his brother’s home as the address 
from which the claimant should be monitored.

THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY  
Approved Judgment   
 
 49. On behalf of the first defendant, Mr Messling submits that there has been “no change 
of circumstances affecting the order” within the meaning of section 18 because the 
statutory language cannot have been intended by Parliament to include circumstances 
wher e the subject of the SCPO leaves the United Kingdom without notifying the 
authorities, in breach of the subject’s SCPO.  In the absence of any change of 
circumstances, the court should not entertain the application.  
50. Alternatively, should the court be minded to entertain the application, the SCPO should 
not be discharged. The argument that the order is unenforceable was made before the 
judge and rejected. The claimant has a long history of failing to comply with the 
conditions of his SCPOs.  In so far as the claimant’s situation has changed, it has only 
changed as a result of his deliberate flouting of his licence conditions, the conditions of 
his post -licence supervision and the conditions of his SCPO.   
51. On behalf of the second defendant, Mr Evans likewise submits in writing and orally 
that the court should not entertain the application because there has been no change of 
circumstances.  The claimant’s submissions in the present proceedings are identical t o 
those advanced before HHJ Richards in 2022.  In particular, the judge considered the 
issues of foreign travel and residency.  She considered the issue of the limited 
enforceability of the order.    
52. In relation to the claimant’s assertion that his intention never to return to the United 
Kingdom marks a change of circumstances, Mr Evans points to the different addresses 
that the claimant has provided at different times.  It is difficult to know where h e has 
been living.  He retains close ties to the United Kingdom through his mother who lives 
in Burry Port and whose address is the claimant’s address for service.   
53. Mr Evans submits that it cannot have been the intention of Parliament to allow 
individuals subject to a SCPO simply to move abroad, even to multiple countries, in 
order to frustrate the effectiveness of monitoring and prevention of crime, only then to 
allege change of circumstance necessitating a complete review of the order with a view 
to its discharge.  
54. Mr Evans submits that the claimant is in effect challenging the imposition of the order 
by the judge.  The proper route for such a challenge was the Court of Appeal.  Following 
the exercise of his appeal rights, the claimant chose to abandon his appeal.  H e cannot 
now ask this court to remove the SCPO on the grounds that the judge was wrong to 
impose it.   
55. Mr Evans submits in the alternative that the claimant’s breaches of the SCPO, his 
breaches of licence conditions following release from prison, his breaches of post -
sentence supervision requirements, and his continued non -compliance with the present 
SCPO d emonstrate the necessity of keeping the order in place.  The true purpose of the 
present application is to enable the claimant to travel to and from the United Kingdom 
freely without monitoring in place.    
Analysis and conclusions  
56. The claimant makes a number of complaints about how his licence conditions and his 
release on licence were managed, claiming that the licence conditions did not reflect 
the realities of his residence in Belarus.  He complains about how his SCPO has been

THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY  
Approved Judgment   
 
 managed, monitored and supervised.  Irrespective of whether they have any merit, I do 
not regard these other complaints as relevant to the present statutory application.    
57. When she made the order, the judge was inevitably aware that: (i) the claimant lived 
abroad in the sense that he intended to live in Belarus on release from his sentence; (ii) 
the order would not in practical terms be enforceable during any period of resid ency 
abroad; (iii) the SCPO was first imposed as long ago as 2012; and (iv) the claimant had 
since 2015 been convicted of only two offences other than offences of breaching the 
SCPO, such that the ties between the 2012 offence and the SCPO may have been 
weakening.  I agree with the defendants that a challenge based on any of those matters 
is a challenge to the imposition of the SCPO that should have been made to the Court 
of Appeal under section 24 of the Act.    
58. The claimant lodged an appeal but then abandoned it.  The statutory scheme for 
discharge in this court is not designed or intended to enable an offender to circumvent 
the appellate process by launching a collateral attack on the imposition of the order.  
This court will treat the SCPO as lawfully made and as compatible with the claimant’s 
human rights and common law rights at the time it was made.  Any other approach 
would undermine the statutory scheme for appeals.      
59. It is self -evident that time has passed – both since the order was made and since the 
appeal was abandoned. However, the passing of time was already within the 
contemplation of the judge when she imposed a five -year period of duration and so 
cannot constit ute a “change of circumstances.”   In any event, there must be a change 
“affecting the order” which (as Mr Messling emphasised) is the statutory test.  The 
order is founded on the decision of the sentencing judge that it should remain in place 
for five yea rs.  Parliament cannot have intended that the order be affected solely by the 
passing of time which would undermine the authority of the judge’s decision and the 
scheme for appeal by permitting collateral challenge.    
60. If the claimant had wanted to challenge the duration of the order, he should have applied 
to the Court of Appeal.   A request to this court to discharge an order solely on the basis 
of the passing of time amounts to an illegitimate collateral attack.      
61. The judge was aware and took into consideration that (subject to his confinement in 
prison in Swansea) the claimant did not live, and did not want to live, in the United 
Kingdom.  The claimant accepts as much.  The judge properly considered future risk.  
Read as a whole, her ruling demonstrates that she undertook a prospective analysis, 
which involved the consideration of the claimant’s future circumstances including his 
plans to live abroad.  Despite knowing that the claimant planned to live abroad, the 
judge interpreted the requirement upon the claimant to notify the police of his home 
address - and other property which he owns or occupies - as extending to addresses 
“outside the United Kingdom.”  The issue of whether the SCPO was enforceable and 
effective  abroad was before her. That issue cannot in my judgment be regarded as 
marking a change of circumstances.   
62. Taking the claimant’s case at its highest, he now asserts that he does not intend to return 
to the United Kingdom.  He is no longer dividing his time between Wales and Belarus, 
which was the situation before the judge when she made the SCPO.  This assertio n may 
mark a difference between his submissions to me and his submissions to the judge: he

THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY  
Approved Judgment   
 
 may not have said in terms to the judge that he would not return to the United Kingdom 
at all.   
63. In my judgment, the claimant’s simple expression of intention is not the sort of 
circumstance that Parliament would have intended to affect a SCPO.  Otherwise, he 
would defeat the SCPO simply by the announcement of an intention.  Such an approach 
would pre vent the court from analysing his conduct (i.e. what he has said and done) 
since the SCPO was imposed.   
64. Analysing what the claimant has said and done since the SCPO was made, I agree with 
Mr Evans that it is still too early to determine whether the claimant will in fact sever 
his ties with the United Kingdom. The reliability of the claimant’s expression of 
intention is weakened by the difficulties that the court has encountered in understanding 
when and where the claimant has lived since the order was made.  His expressions of 
intention to live in Belarus have proved to be unreliable when he now lives in Russ ia.  
He retains family links to Wales.     
65. There is no more than an initial attraction in the submission that the order fails to serve 
the purpose of the Act because its requirements cannot be effective or enforced while 
the claimant is abroad.  The order is no less effective or enforceable than ma ny other 
orders where the person subject to the order leaves the United Kingdom.  While there 
may be barriers to enforcement while the claimant is abroad, the order is neither too 
vague nor too unclear to be enforceable in this jurisdiction.    
66. The claimant relies on KBR  to submit that the starting point for a consideration of the 
scope of the Serious Crime Act 2007 is the presumption in domestic law in this 
jurisdiction that legislation is generally not intended to have extra -territorial effect 
(KBR , above, para 21).   However, the same case makes plain (at para 23) that nationals 
travelling or residing abroad remain within the personal authority of their state of 
nationality and, consequently, Parliament may legislate with regard to their conduc t 
when abroad subject to limits imposed by the sovereignty of the foreign state.   
67. I was not directed to full authority on the points raised by KBR  and did not hear full 
argument on the jurisdictional question from any party.  It was not necessary for me to 
do so because it does not raise any change of circumstance affecting the order.   
68. By way of observation only, it seems to me that, given the international reach and cross -
border nature of much serious crime, it may be regarded as surprising that Parliament 
would not have intended the statutory scheme to extend to conduct abroad.  I agre e with 
Mr Messling that it is contrary to public policy that an offender may avoid the operation 
of an SCPO by leaving the jurisdiction.  Parliament would not have intended such a 
consequence which would undermine rather than promote the purpose of the Act .  
Section 5(2) of the Act enables “prohibitions, restrictions or requirements in relation to 
places other than England and Wales” which may suggest that Parliament expressly 
empowered the courts to impose restrictions of a sort that relate to places other  than the 
United Kingdom.  In the absence of full argument, I reach no final conclusions in 
relation to these various matters.     
69. It is incorrect to say, as the claimant says, that the order amounts to exile because he 
may be subject to arrest for breach of the order if he were to enter the United Kingdom.

THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY  
Approved Judgment   
 
 It is nothing to the point that he will (just like everyone else) be subject to English law 
if he enters.  Submitting to law cannot possibly be the cause of exile.   
70. Neither the Human Rights Act nor the common law (including Magna Carta) requires 
a different outcome.  In refusing leave to appeal against HHJ Richards’ order, the Single 
Judge observed that Judge Richards took very great care in her consideration of the 
application. She was entitled to find that no third party would be adversely affected the 
making of the order.  There was no question of discrimination; nor was the order unduly 
oppressive or inhumane.  The Single Judge concluded that the SCPO was a “perfec tly 
proper way of seeking to protect the public from future harm.”  I have been provided 
with no persuasive grounds to disagree with the Single Judge’s assessment.  There is 
no reason to suppose that the order poses a disproportionate interference with art icle 8 
rights or with any rights founded on common law.  
71. For these reasons, I do not consider that there has been a change of circumstances 
affecting the order.  I decline to entertain the application.  The claim is dismissed.  
Postscript  
72. I venture to add three more general observations  which have no effect on my 
conclusions above.  First, as is common in the Administrative Court, the claim was case 
managed by one judge and heard by another.   The order making the case management 
directions did not set out whether the claimant had appeare d at the case management 
hearing by video link or by attendance at court.  I understand that he appeared by video 
link from Russia but was not supplied with those details before the substantive hearing.  
Further, the case management directions permitted the claimant to attend the hearing of 
his claim by video link but there was no mention of the country from which he was 
permitted to appear and no enquiries were made about this.  
73. The court has a responsibility for ensuring that a party’s appearance by video link from 
abroad (if permitted at all) remains consistent with the interests of justice and the 
broader public interest.  It is a responsibility that vests in the court on a con tinuing basis 
rather than with an individual judge who may have more or less involvement with the 
case.  The responsibility is not a light one and the parties should assist the court in 
ensuring that it is fulfilled.  To this end, it seems sensible for cou rt orders to record (i) 
where a party was located where a hearing has taken place and (ii) the country in which 
a party is permitted to appear at any future hearings.   
74. Secondly, the High Court in this sort of application will consider whether there has been 
a change of circumstances since the imposition of the SCPO by the Crown Court.  It 
follows that the Crown Court’s reasons for making the order are important as they m ark 
the base line from which a change of circumstances will be assessed.  The claimant 
should obtain a transcript of the judge’s reasons for imposing the order.  If the claimant 
does not have the means or ability to do so, the Director of Public Prosecutio ns should 
- as part of the Crown’s public interest duties - assist the court by obtaining a transcript 
and placing it before the court.  I was rather surprised that, in this case, the existence of 
the transcript of Judge Richards’ ruling was unknown to me until part way through the 
hearing, when the claimant told me that the CPS had sent him a copy.       
75. Thirdly, the prosecution and not the police applied to the Crown Court to make the 
SCPO . The Director of Public Prosecutions has expertise in the operation of the

THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY  
Approved Judgment   
 
 criminal justice system in the public interest and was well placed to deal with the 
claimant’s claim before me.  In the event, I heard separate but similar submissions from 
both defendants (who instructed separate counsel) which has added to costs.  The 
Director of Public Prosecutions is in my view the correct defendant in this kind of 
application.