Neutral Citation Number: [2021] EWHC 27 (Admin) 
 
Case No: CO/2368/2016 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE 
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION 
DIVISIONAL COURT 
 
Royal Courts of Justice 
Strand, London, WC2A 2LL 
 
Date: 08/01/2021 
 
Before : 
 
LORD JUSTICE BEAN 
& 
MRS JUSTICE FARBEY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Between : 
 
 PRIVACY INTERNATIONAL Claimant 
 - and -  
 INVESTIGATORY POWERS TRIBUNAL Defendant 
 - and -  
 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR FOREIGN,  
COMMONWEALTH AND DEVELOPMENT 
AFFAIRS 
- and - 
GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION 
HEADQUARTERS 
 
  
 
 
Interested 
Parties 
 
 
 
Ben Jaffey QC and Tom Cleaver (instructed by Bhatt Murphy) for the Claimant 
The Defendant Tribunal did not appear and was not represented. 
Sir James Eadie QC and Richard O’Brien (instructed by Government Legal Department) 
for the Interested Parties 
 
Hearing dates: 8-9 December 2020 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Approved Judgment

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 Lord Justice  Bean  and Mrs Justice Farbey :  
1. This is the judgment of the court to which we have both contributed.   
2. The Claimant applies for judicial  review of the judgment of the Investig atory Powers 
Tribunal (“the Tribunal”) dated 12 February 2016.  It invites the court to quash the 
judgment and to grant relief in the form of a declaration as to the scope of section 5 of 
the Intelligence Services Act  1994 (“the 1994 Act”).  The question raised in the claim 
relates particularly to computer network exploitation  (“CNE”), colloquially  known as 
computer hacking. The question posed in the Statement of Facts and Grounds is: 
“Does section 5 of [the 1994 Act] permit the issue of a ‘thematic ’ computer hacking 
warrant authorising acts in respect of an entire class of people or an entire class of 
such acts?”  
3. We heard submissions from Mr Ben Jaffey QC (with Mr Tom Cleaver) on behalf of 
the Claimant and Sir James Eadie QC (with Mr Richard O’Brien) on behalf of the 
Interested Parties.  We repeat the thanks that we gave at the hearing for their excellent 
oral and written advocacy .   
4. The three UK intelligence agencies (“the Agencies ”) are the Security Service, 
generally known as MI5 ; the Secret Intelligence Service, generally known as MI6 ; 
and Government Communication Headquarters (“ GCHQ ”). Before 1989, the 
functio ns and indeed the existence  of the Agencies were not officially acknowledged : 
this was a somewhat artificial state of affairs since, for example, in the mid -1980s 
GCHQ featured twice in litigation which reached the House of Lords  (Waite v 
Government Commun ication Headquarters [1983 ] 2 AC 714 ; Council of Civil Service 
Unions v Minister of the Civil Service [1985] AC 374) . The activities  of the Agencies 
were not the subject of statutory regulation.   
5. By section 1 (1) of the Security Service Act 1989, Parliamen t acknowledged the 
existence of the Security Service.  At the same time, its functions were placed on a 
statutory footing as being the protection of national security, the safeguarding of the 
economic well -being of the United Kingdom , and the support of la w enforcement 
agencies in the prevention and detection of serious crime (section 1(3)).         
6. The Secret Intelligence Service was acknowledged by the 1994 Act . Its function was 
established as obtaining and providing information relating to the actions or  intentions 
of persons abroad for national security and other reasons (section 1).  GCHQ was 
acknowledged by section 3(1).  Its function is , so far as relevant to the present case , to 
monitor or interfere with electromagnetic, acoustic and other emissions and any 
equipment producing such emission s.  This function is exercisable only in the 
interests of national security, the economic well -being of the United Kingdom , and 
the support of the prevention or detection of serious crime (section 3(2) ).       
7. CNE i s a set of techniques through which an individual or organisation gains cover t 
and remote access to equipment (including both networked and mobile computer 
devices) typically with a view to obtaining information from it.  CNE  can be a critical 
tool in inv estigations into the full range of threats to the United Kingdom such as 
terrorism, serious and organised crime , and other national security threats.  As the  
Tribunal observed at para 3 of their judgment: “[t]he particular significance of the use 
of CNE is that it addresses difficulties for the Intelligence Agencies caused by the

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 ever increasing use of encryption by those whom the Agencies would wish to target 
for interception.”   Its value to the protection of those who live in the United Kingdom 
from individuals engaged in (among other things) terrorist attacks, espionage and 
serious organised crime is beyond  dispute.                                          
8. In July 2014, the Claimant, along with others, issued proceedings  in the Tribunal 
against the Interested Parties.  The Claimant challenged various aspects of the 
arrangements under which the Agencies were believed to make use of CNE  including 
the use of thematic warrants .  A preliminary hearing  took place on points of law on 1 -
3 December 2015.   At that open hearing, the extent and scope of the use of thematic 
warrants in practice was not considered. It was however common ground that GCHQ 
had obtained warrants in respect of CNE under section 5 of  the 1994 Act.     
9. The Tribunal were asked to rule on ten issues of law. It will help to give an overview 
of the hearing before them to set out their conclusions: - 
“Issue 1: An act  (CNE) which would be an offence under s.3 
of the CMA is made lawful by a s .5 warrant or s. 7 
authorisation, and the amendment of s. l 0 CMA was simply 
confirmatory of that fact.  
Issue 2: An act abroad pursuant to ss.5 or 7 of the ISA which 
would otherwise be an offence under ss.1 and/or 3 of the CMA 
would not be unlawful.  
Issue  3: The power under s.5 of ISA to authorise interference 
with property encompasses intangible property.  
Issue 4: A s.5 warrant is lawful if it is as specific as possible in 
relation to the property to be covered by the warrant, both to 
enable the Secretar y of State to be satisfied as to legality, 
necessity and proportionality and to assist those executing the 
warrant, so that the property to be covered is objectively 
ascertainable, and it need not be defined by reference to named 
or identified individuals.   
Issue 5: There might be circumstances in which an individual 
claimant might be able to claim a breach of Article 8/10 rights 
as a  result of a s.7 authorisation, but that does not lead to a  
conclusion that the s.7 regime is non -compliant with Articles 8  
or 10.  
Issue 6:  A s.5 warrant which accords with the criteria of 
specification referred to in Issue 4 complies with the safeguards 
referred to in  [the decision of the European Court of Human 
Rights in]  Weber  (1) to (3), and consequently with Articles 8 
and 10 in that regard.   
Issue 7: If information were obtained in bulk through the use of 
CNE,  there might be circumstances  in which an individual

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 complainant might be able to mount a claim, but in principle 
CNE is lawful.  
Issue 8: The s.5 regime since Feb ruary 2015 is compliant with 
Articles 8/10.  
Issue 9: The s.5 regime prior to February 2015 was compliant 
with Articles 8/10.  
Issue 10: So far as concerns the adequacy of dealing with LPP,  
the CNE regime has been compliant with the Convention since 
Febru ary 2015.”  
10. The Claimant applied for judicial review of the Tribunal’s conclusions on Issue 4. The 
Interested Parties raised the question of whether section 67(8) of the Regulation of 
Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (“RIPA”) , the statute which created the T ribunal , 
ousted the supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court to quash a judgment of the 
Tribunal for error of law. On 17 June 2016 Lang J granted permission for judicial 
review but directed that jurisdiction should be tried as a preliminary issue. The 
Divisional Court and Court of Appeal held that there was no jurisdiction but on 15 
May 2019 the Supreme Court, by a majority of 4 -3, allowed the Claimant’s appeal 
and held that this court does indeed have jurisdiction ([2020] AC 491; [2019] UKSC 
22).    
11. In October 2019 an application was made to amend the claim to seek judicial review 
of the T ribunal ’s conclusion on Issue 9, namely whether the use of CNE by GCHQ 
prior to publication of the draft Equipment Interference Code in February 2015  had 
been in contrav ention of Article 8 and/or Article 10  of the European Convention on 
Human Rights (“the Convention”) . On 8 January 2020 Steyn J approved a consent 
order under which the question of whether leave to amend should be granted would be 
dealt with on a rolled -up basis together with the existing judicial review claim for 
which permission had been given in 2016 . 
The relevant statutes  
12. Section 5(2)  of the 1994  Act  is the crucial provision in this case. A s originally 
enacted in 1994, it provided that the Secretary of  State could issue a warrant: - 
"authorising the taking ... of such action as is specified in the 
warrant in respect of any property so specified or in respect of 
wireless telegraphy so specified if the Secreta ry of State:  
(a) thinks it necessa ry for the a ction to be taken on the ground 
that it is likel y to be of substantial value in assisting ...  
(iii) GCHQ ……   
in ca rrying out any function which falls within Section 
3(l)(a) and  
(b) is satisfied that what the action seeks to achieve cannot 
reasonably be achi eved by other means and

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 (c) is satisfied that satisfactory arrangements are in force under 
. . . section 4(2)(a)  above with respect to the disclosure of 
information obtained ... and that any information obtained 
under the warrant will be subject to those arrangements".  
13. From 25 September 2000, s ection 5(2)(b) was amended to substitute a requirement 
that the Secretary of State must be satisfied that the taking of the action is 
proportionate to what it seeks to achieve : this change was made by  RIPA, which came 
into effect on 2 October 2000, the same day as the Human Rights Act.  
14. We set out the relevant provisions of sections 5, 6 and 7 of the Intelligence Services 
Act 1994 as they were in force at the date of the Tribunal’s judgment on 12 February 
2016 (there have been some amendments since that time , but they are not material to 
the issues before us), omitting provisions relating to Scotland: - [emphasis added]  
5  Warrants: general  
(1) No entry on or interference with property or with wireless 
telegra phy shall be unlawful if it is authorised by a warrant 
issued by the Secretary of State under this section.  
(2) The Secretary of State may, on an application made by .  . . 
GCHQ, issue a  warrant under this section authorising the 
taking, subject to subse ction (3) below, of such action as is 
specified in the warrant in respect of any property so specified 
or in respect of wireless telegraphy so specified if the Secretary 
of State – 
(a) thinks it necessary for the action to be taken for the 
purpose of assis ting  
...  
(iii) GCHQ in carrying out any function which falls within 
section 3(J)(a) above; and  
(b) is satisfied that the taking of the action is proportionate to 
what the action seeks to achieve;  
(c) is satisfied that satisfactory arrangements are in f orce 
under section 2(2)(a) of the [Security Service Act 1989 ("the 
1989 Act")] (duties of the Director -General of the Security 
Service), section 2(2)(a) above or section 4(2)(a) above with 
respect to the disclosure of information obtained by virtue of 
this section and that any information obtained under the 
warrant will be subject to those arrangements.  
(2A) The matters to be taken into account in considering 
whether the requirements of subsection (2)(a) and (b) are 
satisfied in the case of any warrant sha ll include whether what

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 it is thought necessary to achieve by the conduct authorised by 
the warrant could reasonably be achieved by other means.  
(3) A warrant issued on the application of the Intelligence 
Service or GCHQ for the purposes of the exercise o f their 
functions by virtue of section . .  . 3(2)(c) above may not relate 
to property in the British Islands.  
(3A) A warrant issued on the application of the Security 
Service for the purposes of the exercise of their function under 
section 1 (4) of the S ecurity Service Act 1989 may not relate to 
property in the British Islands unless it authorises the taking of 
action in relation to conduct within subsection (3B) below.  
(3B) Conduct is within this subsection if it constitutes (or, if it 
took place in the  United Kingdom, would constitute) one or 
more offences, and either – 
(a) it involves the use of violence, results in substantial 
financial gain or is conduct by a  large number of persons in 
pursuit of a  common purpose; or  
(b) the offence or one of the offences is an offence for which 
a person who has attained the age of twenty -one and has no 
previous convictions could reasonably be expected to be 
sentenced to imprisonment for a  term of three years or 
more.  
(4) Subject to subsection (5) below, the Secu rity Service may 
make an application under subsection (2) above for a  warrant 
to be issued authorising that Service (or a person acting on its 
behalf) to take such action as is specified in the warrant on 
behalf of the Intelligence Service or GCHQ and, wh ere such a  
warrant is issued, the functions of the Security Service shall 
include the carrying out of the action so specified, whether or 
not it would otherwise be within its functions.  
(5) The Security Service may not make an application for a  
warrant by virtue of subsection (4) above except where the 
action proposed to be authorised by the warrant - 
(a) is action in respect of which the Intelligence Service or, 
as the case may be, GCHQ could make such an application; 
and  
(b) is to be taken otherwise th an in support of the prevention 
or detection of serious crime.  
6 Warrants: procedure and duration, etc.  
(1) A warrant shall not be issued except -

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 (a) under the hand of the Secretary of State or…….  
(b) in an urgent case where the Secretary of State has 
expressly authorised its issue and a  statement of that fact is 
endorsed on it, under the hand of a  senior official; or…….  
(d) in an urgent case where the Secretary of State has 
expressly authorised the issue of warrants in accordance with 
this paragraph b y specified senior officials and a  statement 
of that fact is endorsed on the warrant,  under the hand of the 
specified officials.  
(1A) But a warrant issued in accordance with subsection (1)(d) 
may authorise the taking of an action only if the action is a n 
action in relation to property which, immediately before the 
issue of the warrant, would, if done outside the British Islands, 
have been authorised by virtue of an authorisation under 
section 7 that was in force at that time.  
(1B) A senior official who issues a warrant in accordance with 
subsection (l)(d) must inform the Secretary of State about the 
issue of the warrant as soon as practicable after issuing it.  
(2) A warrant shall, unless renewed under subsection (3) below, 
cease to have effect - 
(a) if the warrant was under the hand of the Secretary of 
State, ……..at the end of the period of six months beginning 
with the day on which it was issued; and  
(b) in any other case, at the end of the period ending with the 
second working day following that day.  
(3) If at any time before the day on which a warrant would 
cease to have effect the Secretary of State considers it 
necessary for the warrant to continue to have effect for the 
purpose for which it was issued, he may by an instrument under 
his hand renew it for a period of six months beginning with that 
day.  
(4) The Secretary of State shall cancel a warrant if he is 
satisfied that the action authorised by it is no longer necessary.  
(5) In the preceding provisions of this section "warrant" means 
a warrant  under section 5 above.  
7. Authorisation of acts outside the British Islands  
(1) If, apart from this section,  a person would be liable in the 
United Kingdom for any act done outside the British Islands, he 
shall not be so liable if the act is one which i s authorised to be

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 done by virtue of an authorisation given by the Secretary of 
State under this section.  
(2) In subsection (1) above "liable in the United Kingdom" 
means liable under the criminal or civil law of any part of the 
United Kingdom.  
(3) The S ecretary of State shall not give an authorisation under 
this section unless he is satisfied – 
(a) that any acts which may be done in reliance on the 
authorisation or, as the case may be, the operation in the 
course of which the acts may be done will be nec essary for 
the proper discharge of a function of the Intelligence Service 
or GCHQ; and  
(b) that there are satisfactory arrangements in force to 
secure - 
(i) that nothing will be done in reliance on the 
authorisation beyond what is necessary for the proper 
discharge of a function of the Intelligence Service or 
GCHQ; and  
(ii) that, in so far as any acts may be done in reliance on 
the authorisation, their nature and likely consequences 
will be reasonable, having regard to the purposes for 
which they are carri ed out; and  
(c) that there are satisfactory arrangements in force under 
section 2(2)(a) or 4(2)(a) above with respect to the disclosure 
of information obtained by virtue of this section and that any 
information obtained by virtue of anything done in relia nce 
on the authorisation will be subject to those arrangements.  
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the power of the 
Secretary of State to give an authorisation under this section, 
such an authorisation - 
(a) may relate to a particular act or acts, to acts of a 
description specified in the authorisation or to acts 
undertaken in the course of an operation so specified ;  
(b) may be limited to a particular person or persons of a 
description so specified ; and  
(c) may be subject to conditions so specifie d.  
(5) An authorisation shall not be given under this section 
except - 
(a) under the hand of the Secretary of State; or

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 (b) in an urgent case where the Secretary of State has 
expressly authorised it to be given and a statement of that 
fact is endorsed on it, under the hand of a senior official.  
(6) An authorisation shall, unless renewed under subsection (7) 
below, cease to have effect - 
(a) if the authorisation was given under the hand of the 
Secretary of State, at the end of the period of six months 
beginning with the day on which it was given;  
(b) in any other case, at the end of the period ending with the 
second working day following the day on which it was 
given.  
(7) If at any time before the day on which an authorisation 
would cease to have effect the Secretary of State considers it 
necessary for the authorisation to continue to have effect for the 
purpose for which it was given, he  may by an instrument under 
his hand renew it for a period of six months beginning with that 
day.  
(8) The Secretary of State shall cancel an authorisation if he is 
satisfied that any act authorised by it is no longer necessary.  
(9) For the purposes of this section the reference in subsection 
(1) to an act done outside the British Islands includes a 
reference to any act which - 
(a) is done in the British Islands; but  
(b) is or is intended to be done in relation to apparatus that is 
believed to be outside  the British Islands, or in relation to 
anything appearing to originate from such apparatus;  
and in this subsection "apparatus" has the same meaning as in 
[RIPA].  
(10) Where - 
(a) a person is authorised by virtue of this section to do an 
act outside the B ritish Islands in relation to property,  
(b) the act is one which, in relation to property within the 
British Islands, is capable of being authorised by a  warrant 
under section 5,  
(c) a person authorised by virtue of this section to do that act 
outside t he British Islands, does the act in relation to that 
property while it is within the British Islands, and

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 (d) the act is done in circumstances falling within subsection 
(11) or (12),  
this section shall have effect as if the act were done outside the 
British Islands in relation to that property.  
(11) An act is done in circumstances falling within this 
subsection if it is done in relation to the property at a  time 
when it is believed to be outside the British Islands.  
(12) An act is done in circumstances  falling within this 
subsection if it - 
(a) is done in relation to property which was mistakenly 
believed to be outside the British Islands either when the 
authorisation under this section was given or at a  subsequent 
time or which has been brought within the British Islands 
since the giving of the authorisation; but  
(b) is done before the end of the fifth working day after the 
day on which the presence of the property in the British 
Islands first becomes known.  
(13) In subsection (12) the reference to th e day on which the 
presence of the property in the British Islands first becomes 
known is a  reference to the day  on which it first appears to a  
member of the Intelligence Service or of GCHQ, after  the 
relevant time - 
(a) that the belief that the propert y was outside the British 
Islands was mistaken; or  
(b) that the property is within those Islands.  
(14) In subsection (13) 'the relevant time' means, as the case 
may be – 
(a) the time of the mistaken belief mentioned in subsection 
(12)(a); or  
(b) the time  at which the property was, or was most recently, 
brought within the British Islands.  
Sir Mark Waller’s report  
15. Prior to the coming into force of the provisions of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016 
establishing the office of the Investigatory Powers Commiss ioner, there was an 
Intelligence Services Commissioner appointed pursuant to RIPA. In 2014 and 2015 
the holder of this office was the Rt Hon Sir Mark Waller, a former Lord Justice of 
Appeal. In his report for the year 2014 laid before Parliament and publis hed on 25 
June 2015, he said: -

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 “Thematic Property Warrants   
I  have expressed concerns about the use of what might be 
termed "thematic" property warrants issued under section 5 of 
ISA. ISA section 7 makes specific reference to thematic 
authorisations (what  are called class authorisation) because it 
refers “to a particular act" or to "acts" undertaken in the course 
of an operation. However, section 5 is narrower , referring to 
"property so specified".  
During 2014 I have discussed with all the agencies and th e 
warrantry units the use of section 5  in a way which seemed to 
me arguably too broad or "thematic". I have expressed my view 
that:  
• section 5 does not expressly allow for a class of 
authorisation; and  
• the words "property so specified" might be narrowly 
construed , requiring the Secretary of State to consider a 
particular operation against a particular piece of property as 
opposed to property more generally described by reference 
for example to a described set of individuals.  
The agencies and the  warrant ry units argue that ISA refers to 
action and properties which "are specified " which they 
interpret  to mean "described by specification". Under this 
interpretation they consider that the property does not 
necessarily need to be specifically identif ied in advance as long 
as what is stated in the warrant can properly be said to include 
the property that is the subject of the subsequent interference . 
They argue that sometimes time constraints are such that if they 
are to act to protect national securit y they need a warrant which 
"specifies" property by reference to a described set of persons, 
only being able to ident ify with precision an individual at a 
later moment.  
I accept the agencies' inte rpretation is very arguable. I also see 
in practical terms the national security requirement.  
The critical thing however is that the submission and the 
warrant must be set out in a way which allows the Secretary of 
State to make the decision on necessity and proportionality.  
Thus, I have made it clear:  
 A Sec retary of State  can only sign the warrant if they 
are able property to assess whether it is necessary and 
proportionate to authorise the activity.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
  The necessity and propo rtionality consideration must 
not be delegated  
 Property warrants under the present legislat ion should 
be as narrow as possible; and  
 Exceptional circumstances where time constraints 
would put national security at risk will be more likely to 
justify “thematic” warrants.  
This has led to one of the agencies withdrawing a thematic 
property warrant in  order to better define the specified property. 
We remain in discussion to find a way to do so but I am 
anxious to ensure that they are not missing intelligence 
opportunities which might endanger national security.  
I made five recommendations at each of t he intelligence 
agencies and warrantry units in relation to what might be 
termed thematic property warrants.  
(1) for any warrants which might be considered to be 
thematic to be highlighted in the list provided for my 
selection;  
(2) the terms of a warrant a nd the submission must always be 
such as to enable the Secretary of State to assess the 
necessity and proportionality;  
(3) the assessment to proportionality and necessity should 
not be delegated;  
(4) property warrants should be as narrow as possible but 
circumstances where time constraints and national security 
dictate may allow a more broadly drawn ”thematic” warrant; 
and 
(5) as the agencies and the Secretary of State have made 
clear to me is the case, thematic or broadly drawn warrants 
should not be asked  for simply for administrative 
convenience. ” 
The Investigatory Powers Act 2016  
16. The Investigatory Powers Act 2016 creates a new regime for the authorisation of 
warrant s for certain purposes. Sections 99, 101  and 102 provide for “targeted 
equipment interference warrants ”. Section 99(2) defines a targeted equipment 
interference warrant as one which authorises or requires the addressee to secure 
interference with any equipment for the purpose of obtaining communications, 
equipment data or any other inf ormation. Section 101(1) provides: -

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 “(1) A targeted equipment interference warrant may relate to 
any one or more of the following  matters — 
(a) equipment belonging to, used by or in the possession of a 
particular person or organisation;  
(b) equipment belong ing to, used by or in the possession of a 
group of persons who share a common purpose or who carry 
on, or may carry on, a particular activity;  
(c) equipment belonging to, used by or in the possession of 
more than one person or organisation, where the inter ference 
is for the purpose of a single investigation or operation;  
(d) equipment in a particular location;  
(e) equipment in more than one location, where the 
interference is for the purpose of a single investigation or 
operation;  
(f) equipment which is bei ng, or may be, used for the 
purposes of a particular activity or activities of a particular 
description;  
(g) equipment which is being, or may be, used to test, 
maintain or develop capabilities relating to interference with 
equipment for the purpose of obtaining communications, 
equipment data or other information;  
(h) equipment which is being, or may be, used for the 
training of persons who carry out, or are likely to carry out, 
such interference with equipment.”  
17. Notwithstanding the coming into force of these powers in the 2016 Act , Issue 4 
decided by the Tribunal in 2016 , unlike Issue 9, is not of merely historic al 
significance. Section 5 of the 1994 Act remains the governing regime in respect of: - 
a) covert entry and search of premises or good s 
b) interferenc e with goods  
c) interference with intellectual property rights; and  
d) computer hacking where the aim is not to acquire data , but to destroy 
or otherwise manipulate the functioning of electronic systems.  
The Tribunal’s judgment  on issue 4  
18. After referring to the submissions of Mr Jaffey QC for the Claimants, including his 
reliance on 18th century authorities on general warrants to which we shall come later, 
and to those of Mr Eadie QC (as he then was) for the Respondents, the Tribunal said: -

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 “37. Eighteenth century abhorrence of general warrants issued 
without express statutory sanction is not in our judgment a 
useful or permissible aid to construction of an express statutory 
power given to a Service, one of whose principal functions is to 
further the interest s of UK national security, with particular 
reference to defence and foreign policy. The words should be 
given their natural meaning in the context in which they are set.  
38. The issue as to whether the specification is sufficient  in 
any particular case w ill be dependent on the particular facts of 
that case. The courts frequently have to determine such 
questions for example in respect of a warrant under the Police 
Act 1997 s.93, when the issues, by reference to the particular 
facts would be fully aired in open. That is not possible in 
relation to a s.5 wa rrant, but it may still be subject to scrutiny 
by the Intelligence Services Commissioner, by the ISC and, if 
and when a  complaint is made to this Tribunal, then by this 
Tribunal. But the test is not in our  judgment different -Are the 
actions and the property sufficiently identified? The Home 
Secretary's own words as recorded in paragraph 42 of the ISC 
Report, set out in paragraph 32 above, relating to a s.8(1) 
warrant, are applicable here also. It is not in  our judgment 
necessary for a  Secretary of State to exercise judgment in 
relation to a warrant for it to be limited to a  named or 
identified individual or list of individuals. The property should 
be so defined, whether by reference to persons or a  group  or 
category of persons, that the extent of the reasonably 
foreseeable interference caused by the authorisation of CNE in 
relation to the actions and property specified in the warrant can 
be addressed.  
39. As discussed in the course of argument, the word under 
consideration is simply specified, and this may be contrasted 
with other statutes such as those relating to letters of request, 
where the requirement of the Evidence (Proceedings in Other 
Jurisdictions) Act 1975 is for "particular documents specified ''. 
There is no requirement here for specification of particular 
property, but simply for specification of the property, which in 
our judgment is a  word not of limitation but of description, and 
the issue becomes one simply of sufficiency of identificatio n.  
40. The statute does not fall to be interpreted by reference to 
the underlying Code, in particular one which, like the E I Code, 
has been in draft waiting to be approved by Parliament. But 
what is of course important is what is put in the applications to 
the Secretary of State, so that he can exercise his discretion 
lawfully and reasonably. Both in the Property Code, in place 
since 2002, (at paragraphs 7.18 -7.19) and now in the EI Code 
(at paragraph 4.6), there is a lengthy list of what is required to 
be included in an application to the Secretary of State for the

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 issue or renewal of a s.5 warrant. Apart from a description of 
the proposed interference and the measures to be taken to 
minimise intrusion, at the head of the list in both Codes is a 
requireme nt to specify "the identity or identities, where known, 
of those who possess [or use] the [equipment] that is to be 
subject to the int erference" and "sufficient information to 
ident ify the [equipment] which will be affected by the 
interference" (the square  bracketed parts are the changes from 
the Property Code to the draft EI Code).  
41. We are entirely satisfied that Mr Jaffey's submissions have 
confused the property to be specified with the person or persons 
whose ownership or use of the equipment may assi st in its 
identification. We do not accept his submission (Day 2/12) that 
the Secretary of State has to consider, by reference to each 
individual  person who might use or own such equipment, 
whether CNE would be justified in each individual case.   
Questio ns of necessity and proportionality to be applied by the 
Secretary of State must relate to the foreseeable effect of the 
grant of such a warrant, and one of the matters to be considered 
is the effect and extent of the warrant in the light of the 
specificat ion of the property in that warrant.  
42. As originally enacted,  s.5(2) authorised the Secretary of 
State to issue a warrant  "authorising the taking ... of such action 
as is specified in the warrant in respect of any property so 
specified or in respect of  wireless telegraphy so specified if the 
Secretary  of State: (a) thinks it necessary  for the action to be 
taken on the ground that it is likely  to be of substantial value in 
assisting  ... [our underlining] (iii) GCHQ in carrying  out any 
function which fall s within Section 3(l)(a) and (b) is satisfied 
that what the action seeks to achieve cannot reasonably be 
achieved by other means and (c) is satisfied that satisfactory 
arrangements are in force under . . . Section 4(2)(a)above with 
respect to the disclosur e of information obtained ... and that any 
information obtained under the warrant will be subject to those 
arrangements".  
43. " Specified ” must mean the same in relation to each action, 
property and wireless telegraphy. "Wireless telegraphy" as 
defined by s.1l(e) of ISA meant "the emitting or receiving over 
paths which are not provided by any material substance 
constructed or arranged for that purpose, of electro magnetic 
energy or frequency not exceeding 3  million megacycles per 
second ... ". ( s.19(1) Wir eless Telegraphy Act 1949).  
44. Given the width of meaning contained in the words "action" 
and "wireless telegraphy" and, at least potentially,  in the word 
"property", specified cannot have meant anything more 
restrictive than 'adequately described'. The  key purpose of 
specifying is to permit a  person executing the warrant to know

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 when it  is executed that the action which he is to take and the 
property or wireless telegraphy with which he is to interfere is 
within the scope of the warrant.  
45. It there fore follows that a warrant issued under s.5 as 
originally enacted was not required: i) to identify one or more 
individual items of property by reference to their name, 
location or owner or ii) to identify property in existence at the 
date on which the war rant was issued. Warrants could 
therefore, for example, lawfully be issued to permit GCHQ to 
interfere with computers used by members, wherever located, 
of a  group whose activities could pose a  threat to UK national 
security, or be used to further the po licies or activities of a 
terrorist  organisation or grouping, during the life of a  warrant, 
even though the members or individuals so described and/or of 
the users of the computers were not and could not be identified 
when the warrant was issued.  
46. Th e amendment of s.7 in 2001 to add GCHQ cannot alter 
the meaning of s.5, which has, in all respects relevant to this 
Issue, remained unchanged.  
47. In our judgment what is required is  for the warrant to be as 
specific as possible in relation to the proper ty to be covered by 
the warrant, both to enable the Secretary of State to be satisfied 
as to legality,  necessity and proportionality and to assist those 
executing the warrant, so that the property to be covered is 
objectively ascertainable.”  
The Claimants ’ submissions  
19. Mr Jaffey submitted that the Tribunal had misdirected itself in concluding that a 
section 5 warrant would be lawful provided that it “adequately described” property 
which was the target of the warrant.  In contradistinction to section 7 of th e 1994 Act, 
section 5(2) requires the property to be “specified” , not “described.”  The natural 
meaning of “specified” connotes the identification of particular, ascertained things 
rather than a general or collective description of a class of things.   
20. Mr Jaffey relied on the principle of legality as elucidated in cases such as R v 
Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Simms [2000] 2 A.C. 115 .  That 
principle means that the courts will, when interpreting the provisions of a statute, 
presume t hat Parliament did not intend to legislate in a manner which overrides 
fundamental common law rights.  The common law has an aversion to general 
warrants that leave significant matters of judgment and discretion to the person 
executing the warrant rather t han to the person legally or constitutionally responsible 
for issuing it.  In order to prevent the unlawful delegation of discretion from the 
Secretary of State (who issues warrants) to officials in GCHQ (who execute them), 
the word “specify” imposes  a req uirement to be specific about the person or property 
that will be subject to interference.  The principle of legality would otherwise be 
breached.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 21. In view of the importance of the constitutional principle that there can be no 
interference with property without clear and specific legal authorisation, the words of 
an enactment must be unambiguous before the court may interpret Parliament as 
intending t o override rights.  There are no such unambiguous words in section 5. The 
national security context makes no difference as otherwise the courts would sanction 
wide powers to override fundamental rights.   
22. Turning to the proposed new ground, Mr Jaffey submitted that the  Tribunal had 
further erred in concluding that the use of the section 5 power to engage in CNE was 
lawful before the publication of the draft Equipment Interference Code in February 
2016.  Prior to the Code’s publication, almost nothing a bout the arrangements 
governing CNE was publicly acknowledged.  The Property Code existed but there 
was nothing to suggest that it was being treated by the Agencies as applicable to CNE.  
In the absence of published arrangements for the exercise of the sec tion 5 discretion, 
domestic law was insufficiently clear and precise to bestow the necessary qualities of 
legality and foreseeability required by Article 8(2) of the Convention ( Association for 
European Integration and Human Rights v Bulgaria  (6250/00, 28 June 2007, para 75; 
Weber & Saravia v Germany  (2008) 46 EHRR SE5, paras 93 -95). 
23. Mr Jaffey explained the reasons for the delay in raising this ground by reference to the 
progress of the Claimant’s various challenges both in the domestic courts and in the 
European Court of Human Rights.  The lack of clarity, until the Supreme Court’s 
judgment, as to the scope for a domestic remedy had led to some complexity as to the 
appropriate forum for this particular Article 8 argument to be ventilated.  
Acknowledging the  passage of years since the publication of the Equipment 
Interference Code and since the Tribunal’s judgment , as well as legislative changes , 
Mr Jaffey submitted that the argument still raised an important point of public 
interest.  There would be no preju dice to the Interested Parties in allowing this ground 
to be pursued.  For these reasons, the court should extend time and exercise its 
discretion to permit the Claimant to amend its grounds.                 
The Interested Parties’ submissions   
24. Sir James Eadie submitted that there was no error of law in the Tribunal’s  carefully  
reasoned ruling.  The national security context was critical to the proper interpretation 
of section 5.  Directing our attention to various passages in the evidence, he 
emphasised th e extent of the terrorist threat against the United Kingdom and the 
importance of CNE to GCHQ in combatting that threat.  The Government’s counter -
terrorism operations inevitably function in a world without certainties.  When 
enacting section 5, Parliament  would have been aware of, and should be presumed to 
have legislated consistently with, the  operational realities.  Any interpretation of 
section 5 should not require such specificity that its operational effectiveness would 
be limited and its protective purpose undermined.   
25. The Tribunal’s interpretation does not lead to over -broad powers.  On a natural 
reading of section 5, the mechanism s for the control of the Agencies’ discretion are 
the requirements of necessity and proportionality, which the Secretar y of State is 
expressly directed to consider in section 5(2).  Those fundamental safeguards are the 
core considerations when issuing a warrant.  Provided that the property is described to 
a sufficient level of particularity so as to enable the  Secretary o f State to make a

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 proper assessment of necessity and  proportionality, all relevant statutory controls are 
satisfied.       
26. Section 5 permits the Agencies to provide levels of particularity  to a greater  or lesser 
extent, depending on the ir state of knowled ge in any given situation.  As made clear 
by section 6 of the 1994 Act, it may be necessary to act very urgently wi thin the 
confines of the s ection 5 procedure.  In this context, the Tribunal  were right to 
conclude that “specified” cannot have meant anything more  restrictive than 
“adequately described .” 
27. The touchstone for the lawfulness of the warrant cannot be whether or not  the 
exercise of judgement is involved by those officials executing the warrant : every 
warrant will need officials to exercise judgement to some lesser or greater degree, in 
order to ensure that the right person and property are targeted in accordance with the 
words of the warrant.  Nor is it possible to infer the meaning of section 5 from the 
different words of section 7: each se ction has a different function and the breadth of 
powers under section 7 has no counterpart in section 5.  The two sections fall to be 
separately interpreted.   
28. The common law cases on general warrants are not relevant to the interpretation of a 
statutory power. In any event, the Tribunal rightly held that the property covered by a 
warrant must be “objectively ascertainable” which imposes a restraint that was 
lacking in the eighteenth century cases, on which the Claimant relied, and which 
related to truly g eneral warrants.   
29. Sir James submitted that the p rinciple  of legality is of no assistance in the present 
case.   The principle of legality is an important tool of statutory interpretation but no 
more than that: the task of the court is always to decide what  Parliame nt intended 
(AJA v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [2013] EWCA Civ 1342, [2014] 1 
WLR 285, para 28,  per Lord Dyson). The principle has no role where  Parlia ment’s 
intention is  clear from  the ordinary or natural meaning of a statutory provision read in 
the context of the  legislative scheme as  a whole ( R (Gillan) v Commissioner of Police 
of the Metropolis [2006] UKHL 11, [2006] 2 AC 307, para 15, per Lord Bingham of 
Cornhill).   
30. As to Articl e 8 of the Convention, Sir James pointed to the considerable delay in 
bringing this particular aspect of the challenge and to the considerable legislative and 
other changes that have brought about a different landscape.  There was no good 
reason for the co urt to hear argument on historic matters.  The Tribunal had 
considered all relevant elements of the Article 8 claim and had reached conclusions 
that were reasonably open to it.  The Claimants had failed to identify a reviewable 
error of law.         
The ap plication to amend to allege breach of Article 8 before February 2015  
31. Having considered the oral and written submissions on this topic, we refuse 
permission to amend. We do so because although the grounds of claim originally 
lodged raised a number of Artic le 8 issues, this one was not raised until more than 
three years later and more than four years after the period of alleged unlawfulness 
prior to February 2015. The delay has been so substantial that the regime for granting 
warrants under section 5 of the 1994 Act is no longer in force in respect of CNE for

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 the purpose of obtaining information, having been materially replaced by provisions 
of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016 with effect from 31 May 2018. We do not think 
that the court should give a ruling on a complaint relating to a state of affairs which 
had ceased to exist more than four years before the complaint was made. We also bear 
in mind that the Supreme Court held that judicial review should only be granted in 
respect of decisions of the T ribunal  of general significance. Issue 9 is in our view of 
historical significance only.  
Discussion  of Issue 4  
The relevant principles of statutory interpretation  
32. In construing the words of section 5(2), our task is to “ascertain the intention of 
Parliament as expressed in the w ords it has chosen”  (R (Quintavalle) v Secreta ry of 
State for Health  [2003] UKHL 13 , [2003] 2 AC 687, para 3 8, per Lo rd Millett ).  The 
court  acts under the “banner of loyalty to the will of Parliament ” in that its task is to 
“give effect to the true meaning of what Parliament has said” (ibid, para 8 , per Lord 
Bingham of Cornhill).    
33. What Parliament has said  will be derived from the meaning of individual words read 
in the context of the enactment as a whole.  Ascertaining the statutory conte xt does 
not involve a n assessment of  evidence relating to the asserted  advantages of two 
competing interpretations .  We do not therefore regard GCHQ’s written evidence as 
to the national security benefits of thematic warrants as a legitimate interpretative 
tool.  Nor do we r egard the Claimant’s evidence, which criticis es the use of CNE  on 
privacy grounds , as relevant to our task.    
34. Ascertaining the statutory context will instead involve  the court in a legal 
determination of the purpose of the Act.  It is the court’s duty “to favour an 
interpretation of legislation which gives effect to its purpose rather than defeating it” 
(Test Claimants in the Franked Investment Income Group Litigation v Commissioners 
for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs  [2020] UKSC 47, para 155 , per Lord Reed 
and Lord Hodge).   If the enactment is ambiguous, th e meaning which relates the 
scope of the Act to the mischief it is intended to cure should be adopted  rather than a 
different or wider meaning which the situation befor e Parliament did not call for  
(Black -Clawson International  Ltd v Papierwerke Waldhof Aschaffenburg AG  [1975] 
AC 571 at 614C -D).  In the present case, t he Tribunal held that the words of section 
5(2) should “be given their natural meaning in the context in  which they are set. ”  To 
the extent that the Tribunal  meant that it was legitimate to consider the statutory 
purpose, we agree.          
35. The purpose of the 1 994 A ct was (among other things) to place the existence and 
functions of GCHQ  on a statutory footing .  In doing so, Parliament intended that 
GCHQ (together with the other Agencies ) should continue to protect the United 
Kingdom’s national  security  and econo mic well -being , and play its part in the  
prevention of serious  crime . We accept that t hose vital interests form the context of 
the statute as a whol e.     
36. Nevertheless, t here is a distinction between (on the one hand) ascertaining the purpose 
of an enactment and (on the other hand) deploying the statutory context  to bestow on 
the Agencies the widest possible powers  that the language may sustain .  The

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 Interested Parties respectively have constitutional responsibility  for and expertise in 
operational matters relating to national security .  However, t he construction of t he 
provisions of an Act is for the court and for no one else ( Black -Clawson  at 614F per 
Lord Reid).   If the court were to be moved by the view of the Interested Parties  on the 
extent of the powers which they regard as necessary , it would risk departing from 
what Parliament has said.  Far from acting under t he banner of loyalty to Parliament , 
the court would risk frustrating Parliament’s intention .  Even in the critically 
important sphere of national security, the court would overs tep its function.       
37. Nor do we regard the national security  context as implying that Parliament was not 
concerned with the fundamental rights of those who se property may be the subject of 
CNE.  Parliamentary sovereignty means that Parliament may legislate to overrid e 
fundamental rights.  However, Parliament is and must be subject to  political 
constraints : if Parliament decides to enact legislation that is contrary to fundamental 
rights, it must squarely confront what it is doing and accept the political cost.  That 
Parliament has confront ed a breach of rights may be demonstrated not only in the 
express language o f a statute but also b y necessary implication .  In the absence of 
either of those m echanisms, the courts will presume that fundamental rights are 
untouched.  This is the well-established principle of legality ( R v Secretary of State 
for the Home Department, ex parte Simms  [2000] 2 A.C. 115, 130D-F and 131D -G).  
38. The next question is whether section 5(2) of the 1994 Act engages fundamental rights. 
In our view it plainly does, because of the longstanding aversion of the common law 
to general search warrants.   
 
The aversion of the common law to general warrants  
39. The aversion of the common law to general warrants was established by the time of  
William Blackstone.   In his Commentaries on the Laws of England , Book IV ,  he 
wrote  (in the form published by Clarendon Press in 1769  but using modern spelling) : 
“A general  warrant to apprehend all persons suspected , without 
naming o r particula rly describing any person in special, is 
illegal and void for its uncertainty; for it is the duty of the 
magistrate , and ought not to be left to the officer, to judge of 
the ground of suspicion. ” 
40. In his History of the Pleas of the Crown  (1736) , Sir Matthew Hale cited earlier 
authority  to the effect that a general warrant to apprehend anyone suspected of a crime 
was void and would give rise to a false imprisonment  (First American Edition, 
Philadelphia, 1847, Vol 1, p.580) .  
41. In Huckle v Money  (1763) 2 Wilson 205, the Secretary of State (Lord Halifax) had 
granted a warrant that directed four messengers to apprehend “the printers and 
publishers” of an edition of a paper called the North Briton  which contained a 
“seditious libel”  against King George III .   No person was named in the warrant .  One 
of the King’s messengers to whom the warrant was directed – Carrington – suspected 
that the printer was a man called Leach and directed the defendant to execute the 
warrant on the plainti ff who was one of Leach’s  journeym en.  The plaintiff was kept

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 in custody for about six hours.  Followi ng a trial, the jury awarded £300 damages  (the 
equivalent in 2021 terms of £60,000 ).  A new trial was sought on the grounds that the 
damages were excessive .  Refusing to order a new trial ,  Pratt CJ CP  (the future Lord 
Camden) described the warrant as a general warrant because no individual was named 
in it.  Such a warrant  amounted to the exercise of arbitrary power  and was unlawful.  
The “daring at tack” upon the liberty of the subject had justified the grant of 
exemplary damages.   
42. The North Briton  seditious libel was further considered in Money v Leach  (1765) 3 
Burrow 1742, which concerned an action in trespass brought by  Leach against three 
King’s  messengers  who had broken into his home and imprisoned him  for four days.  
The case report shows that Lord Halifax  had issued the warrant “in writing under his 
hand and seal ,” authorising the messengers on behalf of the King to make “strict and 
diligent s earch  for the said authors, printers, and publishers  of the aforesaid seditious 
libel…; and them or any of them having found , to apprehend and seize, together with 
their papers, and to bring in safe custody before [Lord Halifax] , to be examined 
concerning the premises, and to be further dealt with according to law” .   
43. Lord Mansfield CJ KB considered an objection to the warrant on the grounds of the 
“incertainty of the person, being neither named nor described .”  He held:  
“It is not fit, that the receiving or judging of the information 
should be left to the discretion of the officer.  The magistrate 
ought to judge ; and should give certain discretions to the 
officer …Hale and all others hold such an uncertain warrant 
void”.   
Lord Mansfield was here saying that the officer who execute d a warrant c ould not 
lawfully exercise a discretion as to who was to be apprehended: a general warrant 
which did not specify its target was void.              
44. Similarly, in Wilkes v Wood  (1763) Lofft 1, Lord Camden CJ CP held that a general 
warrant enabling the King’s messengers to exercise their own discretion in interfering 
with property was a breach of the right to liberty : 
“The defendants claimed a right, under precedents, to force 
persons hou ses, break open escrutores, seize their papers, &c. 
upon a general warrant, where no inventory is made of the 
things thus taken away, and where no offenders names are 
specified in the warrant, and therefore a discretionary power 
given to messengers to sear ch wherever their suspicions may 
chance to fall.   If such a power is truly invested in a Secretary 
of State, and he can delegate this power, it certainly may affect 
the person and property of every man in this kingdom, and is 
totally subversive of the liberty of the subject. ” 
45. We take from Blackstone, Hale and the general warrant cases  that it is a fundamental 
right of an individual under the common law that he or she should not be 
apprehended , or have property seized  and searched , save by decision of the person 
legally charged with issuing the warrant.   Expressed in modern legal language, a 
general warrant is one which requires  the exercise of judgment or discretion by the

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 official executing the warrant  as to which individuals or which p roperty should  be 
targeted.   It follows that a  general warrant gives rise to an unlawful delegation of 
authority  by the legally entrusted decision -maker to the executing official.   This 
unlawful delegation breaches a fundamental right .      
46. We appreciate that t he Secretary of State in the general warrant cases was exercising 
common law or prerogative powers not authorised by statute , and that two of those 
cases involved - at least partly  - the physical liberty of the subject .  Nevertheles s, Mr  
Jaffe y was correct to say that the right not to have property searched other than by the 
authority of the law has always been treated as a fundamental right.   The great case of  
Entick v Carrington  (1765) 19 State Tr 1029  held that the Secretary of State could not 
order searches of private property without authority conferred by an Act of Parliament 
or the common law.   In doing so, the court emphasised the connection between 
property and privacy: a  person’s papers (containing private information) are their 
owner’s “dea rest property”  whose secret  nature cannot be the subject of intrusion 
without legal authority.    
47. Entick v Carrington  and the other general warrant cases of the 1760s are  not a mere  
historical footnote , nor, as Sir James put it, of only “marginal relevance” .   Some of 
the language used by Lord Camden, comparing general search warrants to the 
practices of the Spanish Inquisition, seems overblown to modern eyes; and no one 
today would be awarded exemplary damages at the rate of £10,000 per hour for six 
hours’ wrongful detention. But the fundamental message remains good law. Indeed, 
the common law ’s insistence that the Government cannot search private premises 
without lawful authority  has been recently confirmed by a unanimous  Supreme Court 
as having the status of a constitutional principle ( R (Miller) v Prime Minister; Cherry 
v Advocate General for Scotland  [2019] UKSC 41, [2020] AC 373, para 40).            
48. We have for these reasons concluded that the principle of legality expounded in 
Simms  extends to the issuing of  general warrants whether in relation to physical 
liberty or in relation to interference with property.  The aversion to general warrants is 
one of the basic principles on which the law of the United Kingdom is founded.  As 
such, it may not be overridden by statute unless the wording of the statute makes clear 
that Parliament  intended to do so  (AXA General Insurance Ltd v HM Advocate [2011] 
UKSC 46, [2012] 1 AC 868, para 152, per Lord Reed, citing Lord Browne -Wilkinson 
in R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Pierson  [1998] AC 539, 
575).  Unambiguous words  are required  (Ahmed v Her Majesty’s Treasury   [2010] 2 
AC 534, para 204).   
49. The proper protection of the citizen against terrorist attack is of the greatest  
importance, and there can be little doubt that technological capabilities operated by 
the Agencies lie at the very heart of the effor ts of the State to safeguard the citizen 
against terrorist attack. But we do not accept the suggestion in Sir James’ argument 
that for th is reason powers conferred on the Secretary of State in statute , such as the 
power in section 5(2) of the 1994 Act , must be given the widest possible construction. 
This may not be what Lord Atkin described as an argument “which might have 
acceptably been add ressed to the Court of King ’s Bench in the time of Charles I” , but 
it is entirely contrary to the authorities we have cited in the last paragraph.  
50. Sir James repeatedly emphasised that the “control” on over -broad use of section 5 
warrants is the requirement for the Secretary of State to be satisfied of the necessity

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 and proportionality of the authorisation sought. We note, however, that t here was no 
such requirement in the 1994 Act until the amendments made by RIPA to ensure 
comp liance with the H uman Rights Act. The only requirement was for the Secretary 
of State to “think it necessary for the action to be taken on the ground that it is likely 
to be of substantial value” in assisting the relevant Agency in carrying out any of its 
functions and to be satisfied that what the action sought to achieve could not 
“reasonably be achieved by other means”.  In any event the value judgment about 
necessity and proportionality entrusted to the Secretary of State does not in our view 
assist in c onsideration of why Parliament used the word “specified” in relation to the 
contents of the warrant.  
51. A recent and striking  example of the courts’ approach to powers of search in the 
context of the fight against terrorism is Secretary of State for the Home Department v 
GG [2009] EWCA Civ 786, [2010] QB 585. The question was whether a person 
subject to a control order under the Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005 could be 
required to submit to a personal search. Section 1(3) of the Act provided that:  
“The obliga tions that may be imposed by a control order made 
against an individual are any obligations that the Secretary of 
State or (as the case may be) the court considers necessary for 
purposes connected with preventing or restricting involvement 
by that individu al in terrorism -related activity. ”  
Section 1(4), beginning with the words “these obligations may include , in particular” 
[emphasis added], went on to set out in 16 subparagraphs what obligations might be 
imposed, such as:  
“(j) a requirement on him to give  access to specified persons to 
his place of residence or to other premises to which he has 
power to grant access; ” 
(k) a requirement on him to allow specified persons to search 
that place or any such premises for the purpose of ascertaining 
whether obligations imposed by or under the order have been, 
are being or are about to be contravened;  
(l) a requirement on him to allow specified persons, either for 
that purpose or for the purpose of securing that the order is 
complied with, to remove anything f ound in that place or on 
any such premises and to subject it to tests or to retain it for a 
period not exceeding the period for which the order remains in 
force; …..” 
The Court of Appeal held that these provisions did not permit the inclusion in a 
control o rder of a requirement that the controlee submit to a personal search. Dyson 
LJ said  at para 44  that “general statutory words will not suffice to permit an invasion 
of fundamental rights unless it is clear from the whole statutory context that 
Parliament in tended to achieve that result.”  
Application of these principles to section 5(2) of the 1994 Act

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 52. On the  basis of these principles, even looking at section 5(2) in isolation, we would 
conclude that Parliament deliberately used the word “specified” rather th an “of a 
specified description” or “described” , and that the provision as drafted does not 
permit the issue of a general warrant. But that becomes even clearer when one re ads 
the 1994 Act as a whole.  
The contrast with section 7(4)  
53. There is a s triking contr ast between section s 5(2) and 7(4)  of the 1994 Act . The latter, 
which only applies to acts done outside the British Islands, permits authorisations 
which “may relate to a particular act or acts , to acts of a description specified in the 
authorisation or to acts undertaken in the course of an operation so specified ”, and 
“may be limited to a particular person or person of a description so specified”; and , 
for good measure,  the opening words of the  subsection say that these provisions are 
“without prejudice to the generality of the power of the Secretary of State to give an 
authorisation” under section 7. There is no such wording in section 5. If Parliament 
had wished to use the phrase “property of a description specified in the warrant” in 
section  5(2) it could have done so.  “Specified” and “ of a specified description”  are not 
synonyms, and we consider that the use of different words in the two provisions is 
highly significant.  
The contrast with the  2016 Act  
54. There is also a contrast between section 5 of the 1994 Act and the regime established 
by sections 99 -102 of the I nvestigatory Powers Act 2016 for targeted equipment 
interference warrants for the purpose of obtaining communications, equipment data  or 
any other information. The subject matter to which such warrants may relate is set out 
in great detail in section 101(1). It includes, for example, “equipment belonging to, 
used by or in possession of a group of persons who share a common purpose or wh o 
carry on, or may carry on , a particular activity ( section 101(1)(b)) or “which is being, 
or may be, used for the purposes of a particular activity or activities of a particular 
description”  (section 101(1) (f)). As with section 7 of the 1994 Act, the cont rast 
between these very broad powers and the use of the word “specified” in section 5 of 
the 1994 Act is striking. It is also to be noted that, as we have said, section 5 of the 
1994 Act is still in force in relation to CNE for the purpose of disrupting or  destroying 
a target’s electronic capability, as well as for activities such as interference with 
vehicles or other tangible property.  The fact that Parliament left its wording unaltered 
while using entirely different wording for creating new powers of equ ipment 
interference strongly suggests to us a deliberate decision to maintain a distinction 
between the breadth of the relevant powers . It may be that, as Sir James submits, a 
later statute cannot generally be used to interpret an earlier one ; but we do no t 
consider that this rule applies where the later statute has partly replaced the earlier 
provision but partly left it in force.  
Conclusions on Issue 4  
55. The Tribunal’ s formulation was that the warrant must be “as specific as possible… so 
that the property to be covered is objectively ascertainable ”; the latter phrase not 
being derived from the statute but from Sir James’ submissions . They said that this 
requirement was for two reasons: (1) to enable the Secretary of State to make a

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 decision as to legality, necessity and proportionality and (2) to assist those executing 
the warrant.  
56. With respect, w e do not follow  the logic of the first of these two reasons. It is the 
application, not the warrant itself, which the Secretary of State has to consider. 
Section 5 does not lay down requirements about the application for the warrant, but as 
to the content of the warrant itself , which is the Secretary of State’s document .   
57. The real point, as it seems to us , is whether the warrant is on its face sufficiently 
specific to indicate to individual officers at GCHQ – who for these purposes are the 
successors to the King’s Messen gers in the 1760s – whose property, or which 
property, can be interfered with, rather than leaving it to their discretion. That is what 
we understand by the words “objectively ascertainable”  (though they are not used in 
the statute) .  
58. The requirement for w arrants ( except  pursuant to the urgency provisions) to be “under 
the hand of the Secretary of State ” and thus be the product of a decision taken by him 
or her personally further emphasises that Parliament regar ded it as impermissib le to 
delegate to an offi cial the decision as to whose property is to be interfered with.    
59. As Mr Jaffey accepted , a warrant under section 5(2) may properly be issued in respect 
of one or more mobile phones or other devices with listed serial numbers; those used 
by one or more nam ed individuals; those located or being used at one or more sets of 
premises, such as 1 and 2 Acacia Avenue; any device used (in his example) by 
“persons who at today’s date are on the FC DO Syrian diplomatic list”; and any device 
used (again, in his example) by “the blonde haired man , name unknown, seen leaving 
1 Acacia Avenue on 1 December 2015”.  
60. Turning  to location, Mr Jaffey  was prepared to concede that the whole of Acacia 
Avenue could be included, but not a large area such as Birmingham. He did n ot agree 
that a warrant could properly cover anyone who was not within its scope (for 
example, by being on the FCO Syrian diplomatic list, or being in residence at 1 
Acacia Avenue) on the date of issue of the warrant, but who came within it  at some 
future point  during the period for which it was in force.  
61. We do not agree with Mr Jaffey that a warrant could never lawfully permit the use of 
CNE across a broad geographical area (such as a town or city).  The boundaries of a 
geographical area , at least if it is  a local authority area (such as the city of 
Birmingham, or the county of Kent) , are capable of being specified in a warrant  under 
section 5(2) .  Whether the issue of a warrant to allow interference with every mobile 
phone in Birmingham could ever be justi fied as being necessary and proportionate is a 
different question , which does not arise in these proceedings . 
62. We do not regard section 5 as limited to factual situations as at the date of the 
warrant : that is not what the section means. A warrant in respec t of “any device used 
at the Acacia Avenue Internet Café during the period of six months from the date of 
issue of the warrant” would in our view be sufficiently specific, as would “anyone 
who appears on the FC DO Ruritanian diplomatic list during the perio d of six months 
from the date of the warrant”.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  Privacy International v Investigatory Powers Tribunal  
 
 63. However, w e consider that a warrant which referred to the property of anyone 
engaged in an activity (for example “the mobile phone of any person conspiring to 
commit acts of terrorism”) would be insufficiently  specific to satisfy the requirements 
of section 5(2) . Whether a warrant which refers to the property of any one suspected of 
being a member of an organisation , but not named or otherwise identified in the 
warrant , is sufficiently specific will be a fact -sensitive question, the answer to which 
will depend on whether a person’s membership of the organisation is objectively 
ascertainable .  
64. We would therefore answer the question of law in Issue 4 by declaring  that a warrant 
under section 5 of the 1994 Act will be lawful if it is sufficiently specific for the 
property concerned to be objectively ascertainable on the face of the warrant , in the 
sense we have set out in paragraphs 57 to 64 of this judgment.

1 
 IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE     Case No: CO/2368/2016   
QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION  
DIVISIONAL COURT  
 
Lord Justice Bean and Mrs Justice Farbey  
8 January 2021  
 
BETWEEN:  
PRIVACY INTERNATIONAL  
Claimant  
– and – 
 
INVESTIGATORY POWERS TRIBUNAL  
Defendant  
– and – 
 
(1) SECRETARY OF STATE FOR FOREIGN , COMMONWEALTH AND 
DEVELOPMENT AFFAIRS  
(2) GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION HEADQUARTERS  
Interested Parties  
 
          
ORDER  
          
 
UPON  the Claimant’s application for judicial review of the decision of the Defendant (“the 
Tribunal ”) dated 12 February 2016 (“ the Decision ”)  
AND UPON  hearing Ben Jaffey QC and Tom Cleaver for the Claimant and Sir James Eadie QC 
and Richard O’Brien for the Interested Parties (the Tribunal not appearing by counsel)  
IT IS ORDERED THAT:

2 
 1. The Tribunal’s preli minary ruling on ‘Issue 4 ’ (as defined in the Decision ) is quashed.  
2. It is declared that a warrant issued under section 5 of the Intelligence Services Act 1994 
must , in order to be lawful,  be sufficiently specific for the property concerned to be 
objectively ascertainable on the face of the warrant, in the sense set out in paragraphs 57 to 
64 of the judgment of the Divisional Court handed down on 8 January 2021  (“the 
Judgment ”). 
3. The Claimant’s application for permission to amend the claim to seek j udicial review of the 
Defendant’s conclusion on Issue 9 (as defined in the Decision) is dismissed . 
4. The Tribunal’s determination under section 68(4) of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers 
Act 2000 is quashed and is remitted to the Tribunal for reconsideration  in light of the 
Judgment .  
5. The parties shall file and exchange written submissions as to the costs of the proceedings 
(except in so far as already ordered by the Supreme Court in its order of 10 June 2019) by 
4pm on 11 January 2021.  
6. Time f or the Claimant or the Interested Parties to make any application to the Divisional 
Court for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal be extended from 4pm on 11 January 
2021 to 4pm on 1 February 2021.  
7. The Claimant and the Interested Parties shall have  liberty to apply for any further extension 
of time to make any application referred to in paragraph 6.  
8. Time for any application  by the Claimant or the Interested Parties to the Court of Appeal for 
permission to appeal be extended to 21 days from the date  of any decision by the Divisional 
Court on an y application referred to in paragraph 6.