Neutral Citation Number: [2019] EWHC 2953 (Admin)

Case No: CO/4106/2018

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION

DIVISIONAL COURT

Royal Courts of Justice

Strand, London, WC2A 2LL

Date: 06/11/2019

Before:

LORD JUSTICE MALES

MRS JUSTICE JEFFORD

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Between:

CHESTERFIELD POULTRY LIMITED Claimant

- and -

SHEFFIELD MAGISTRATES COURT Defendant

-and –

CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE

Interested Party

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Stephen Hockman QC and Stuart Jessop (instructed by SAS Daniels LLP) for the Claimant

Richard Wright QC and Howard Shaw (instructed by the Crown Prosecution Service) for

the Interested Party

Hearing date: 17th October 2019

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Approved Judgment

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

Lord Justice Males:

1. The issue on this application for judicial review is whether criminal proceedings against

the claimant in the Sheffield Magistrates’ Court were commenced out of time so that the

court has no jurisdiction; or alternatively whether they should be stayed as an abuse of

process.

The background

2. The claimant, Chesterfield Poultry Ltd, is the operator of a slaughterhouse in Doncaster.

The slaughterhouse is approved by the Food Standards Agency (“the FSA”) for the

slaughter and/or dressing of domestic fowl. The claimant began operating from these

premises on 27th June 2016 under conditional approval from the FSA. The FSA granted

full approval on 14th December 2016.

3. On 5th January 2018 the Crown Prosecution Service (“the CPS”) commenced proceedings

against the claimant by the issue of a requisition in the Sheffield Magistrates’ Court for

breaches of Regulations 30(1)(c) and 30(1)(g) of the Welfare of Animals at the Time of

Killing (England) Regulations 2015 (SI 2015 No. 1782) (“the Regulations”). There were

four charges, each of which arose out of the fact that 5,644 chickens were found dead in

the lairage (an area where animals or birds may await slaughter) on 13th September 2016

as a result of what was alleged to be a failure to provide adequate ventilation which had

caused the chickens to suffer avoidable pain, distress or suffering.

4. The matter was initially investigated by the FSA which referred it to the CPS on 13th

March 2017. A lawyer (Ms Gurminder Sanghera) was allocated to the case on 23rd

March. On 24th May 2017 further material was received from the FSA and the case was

reviewed on 24th July by Ms Sanghera. It appears that this was the first substantive

review, so that there was a period of four months and 11 days between the initial receipt

of the case by the CPS and the first review of the file. During part of that time Ms

Sanghera was away on annual leave and attending training courses.

5. As a result of this review an action plan was sent to the FSA and further information was

requested. After further exchanges including the receipt and review of a further witness

statement, Ms Sanghera reviewed the file on 5th January 2018 and was satisfied that

proceedings could be authorised.

The Regulations

6. The issue is whether proceedings were commenced within the period allowed by section

41 of the Regulations, which provides for an exception to the general rule in section

127(1) of the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 that summary criminal proceedings must be

commenced “within six months from the time when the offence was committed, or the

matter of complaint arose”.

7. Section 41 of the Regulations provides:

“Time limit for prosecutions

(1) Notwithstanding section 127(1) of the Magistrates’ Courts

Act 1980, a magistrates’ court may try an information

relating to an offence under these Regulations if the

information is laid—

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

(a) before the end of the period of three years in England the

date of the commission of the offence; and

(b) before the end of the period of six months beginning with

the date on which evidence which the prosecutor thinks is

sufficient to justify the proceedings comes to the

prosecutor’s knowledge.

(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(b)—

(a) a certificate signed by or on behalf of the prosecutor and

stating the date on which such evidence came to the

prosecutor’s knowledge is conclusive evidence of that fact;

and

(b) a certificate stating that matter and purporting to be so

signed is treated as so signed unless the contrary is proved.”

8. These provisions are materially identical to a variety of statutory provisions concerned

with the time limit for prosecutions, including section 6 of the Road Traffic Act 1988,

section 11 of the Computer Misuse Act 1990, section 116 of the Social Security

Administration Act 1992 and section 31 of the Animal Welfare Act 2006. These

provisions have given rise to a considerable volume of litigation. The Regulations gave

effect to Council Regulation (EC) No. 1099/2009 on the protection of animals at the time

of killing, but neither party before us has suggested that the European origin of the

Regulations requires section 41 to be given a different interpretation from that which has

been given to identical provisions in other legislation.

9. Proceedings must be commenced not only within the three-year period referred to in

paragraph 1(a) of section 41, but also within the six-month period referred to in paragraph

1(b). Provision is made, however, for the issue of a certificate by the prosecutor which is

conclusive as to the date from which that six-month period begins to run. I shall refer to

this as “the relevant date”.

10. The prosecution may prove that proceedings were brought in time so far as the six-month

period is concerned in either of two ways. The first is to issue a certificate which, if valid,

is conclusive evidence. The second, if there is no certificate or if the certificate which has

been issued is defective in some way, is to prove as a matter of fact “the date on which

evidence which the prosecutor thinks is sufficient to justify the proceedings” came to the

prosecutor’s knowledge. In the present case the CPS relies on a certificate. It has not

sought to prove in the alternative the underlying facts. I do not find that surprising. If the

CPS were to seek to prove those facts whenever the validity of a certificate was

challenged, the utility of the provision for a conclusive certificate would be undermined.

The consequence, however, as was not disputed before us, is that if the certificate relied

on is invalid, the prosecution will have failed to discharge the burden upon it of proving

that the proceedings were brought in time.

The prosecutor’s certificate

11. In this case two prosecutor’s certificates have been issued but the first can be ignored as it

is accepted that it did not comply with the requirements of paragraph 1(b). It is accepted

also that a defective certificate is a nullity, and that the issue of a defective certificate

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

does not prevent the prosecutor from subsequently issuing a certificate which, if it

complies with the requirements of paragraph 1(b), will be valid and effective. It was so

held in R v Woodward [2017] EWHC 1008 (Admin).

12. The second certificate, on which reliance is placed, is signed by Ms Sanghera in her

capacity as a Specialist Prosecutor of the Specialist Fraud Division of the CPS. It reads as

follows:

“On 8th November 2017 evidence came to my knowledge,

which I thought was sufficient to justify proceedings against:

Chesterfield Poultry Ltd

for offences contrary to:

(1) Regulation 30(1)(g) of the Welfare of Animals at the Time

of Killing (England) Regulations 2015, in respect of

contravening article 3 of Regulation (EC) 1099/2009;

(2) Regulation 30(1)(c) of the Welfare of Animals at the Time

of Killing (England) Regulations 2015, in respect of

contravening the requirement set out in Schedule 1, Part 3,

paragraph 10(a) of the said Regulations;

(3) Regulation 30(1)(c) of the Welfare of Animals at the Time

of Killing (England) Regulations 2015, in respect of

contravening the requirement set out in Schedule 1, Part 3,

paragraph 10(b) of the said Regulations;

(4) Regulation 30(1)(c) of the Welfare of Animals at the Time

of Killing (England) Regulations 2015, in respect of

contravening the requirement set out in Schedule 1, Part 2,

paragraph 5(b)(i) of the said Regulations.”

13. The certified date of 8th November 2017 was less than six months before the

commencement of proceedings.

The application to the District Judge

14. The claimant contended that in fact the date on which evidence sufficient to justify the

proceedings had come to the prosecutor’s knowledge was more than six months before

the date on which proceedings were commenced. Its case was and is that there was

sufficient evidence, in the form of a witness statement by the official veterinary officer, in

the material initially provided to the CPS on 13th March 2017. Accordingly the claimant

applied to the Magistrates’ Court for a ruling that the court had no jurisdiction to hear the

case. As already indicated, the CPS relied on the certificate set out above as conclusive

evidence of the relevant date.

15. There is a dispute between the parties as to whether the ruling given by DJ(MC) Naomi

Redhouse who dealt with the claimant’s application was concerned with the question of

compliance with the time limit set out in section 41 of the Regulations or with the

separate question whether the proceedings amounted to an abuse of process, although Mr

Stephen Hockman QC for the claimant did not pursue this point in his oral submissions to

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

us. To my mind, however, and as I shall explain, the District Judge’s ruling is clear. She

held first that the prosecutor’s certificate complied with the requirements of section 41

and was neither defective on its face nor fraudulent (which matters were not in dispute

before her) and, therefore, that it was conclusive evidence of the relevant date. She then

went on to consider the distinct issue of abuse of process and held that, despite the

disappointing lack of progress for four months after receipt of the papers by the CPS, the

delay would not prevent the claimant from receiving a fair trial. Her decision, therefore,

was that the court had jurisdiction to try the case and that the proceedings should not be

stayed.

The grounds of challenge

16. It is common ground between the parties that as the proceedings in the Magistrates’ Court

have not concluded, the appropriate route to challenge the District Judge’s conclusion is

by way of an application for judicial review. Permission to bring the claim was granted by

HHJ Belcher. Her order granted permission on all grounds “and on the issue of whether

the claim can also be put on the basis of abuse of process”.

17. Mr Stephen Hockman QC and Mr Stuart Jessop for the claimant challenge the lawfulness

of the District Judge’s decision on four grounds, namely that:

(1) the District Judge was wrong to deal with the matter as if it were an application to

stay the proceedings for abuse of process;

(2) the District Judge was wrong to rule that the six-month period should run from the

date of 8th November 2017 stated in the prosecutor’s certificate;

(3) the District Judge should have held that time began to run from the date when the file

was received by the CPS; and

(4) the proceedings should have been stayed as an abuse of process.

Grounds (2) and (3): is the certificate conclusive evidence?

18. Mr Hockman’s main focus was on grounds (2) and (3), which he dealt with together and

which involve a challenge to the conclusive nature of the prosecutor’s certificate. He

submitted, in summary, that:

(1) As a matter of policy the conclusive evidence provisions should be narrowly

construed because (a) they constitute an exception to the general rule in section

127(1) of the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980, (b) they constitute an ouster of the

jurisdiction of the court to determine the true facts (cf. R (Privacy International) v

Investigatory Powers Tribunal [2019] UKSC 22); and (c) they put the question

whether proceedings have been commenced in time entirely in the hands of the

prosecution, subject only to the three-year long stop provision.

(2) As a matter of language, (a) the “fact” which has to be certified is the date on which

evidence came to the prosecutor’s knowledge; (b) the relevant date is the date on

which the evidence was received by the CPS; and (c) while a valid certificate is

conclusive as to the date on which a piece of evidence came to the prosecutor’s

knowledge, it is not conclusive of the issue whether or when the evidence was

sufficient to justify the proceedings.

(3) A certificate is open to challenge on the ground that it is plainly wrong, that being an

objective question to be determined in the light of all the available evidence.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

(4) The certificate in this case was plainly wrong as there was already sufficient evidence

to justify proceedings in the material initially provided to the CPS in March 2017.

19. Mr Hockman pointed to passages in the authorities which deal with materially identical

statutory provisions which, he said, support these submissions.

20. Mr Richard Wright QC for the CPS submitted that the purpose of a certificate is to record

the date on which the prosecutor reached a decision to prosecute and that this was the

proper subject of a certificate; that this is established by the authorities and to hold

otherwise would be a recipe for satellite litigation about prosecutorial decision-making;

and that the certificate in this case is valid and conclusive as to the relevant date.

21. In one sense the only question which matters in this case is whether the certificate relied

on is conclusive evidence of the relevant date. However, it is convenient to begin by

considering what the fact is of which a valid certificate is conclusive evidence. That will

at least inform discussion of the issue as to the status of the certificate in the present case.

I propose to consider these questions by reference to policy considerations, the language

of the Regulations and the authorities.

Policy

22. I recognise that section 41 of the Regulations and other equivalent statutory provisions

are an exception to the general rule in section 127(1) of the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980

that summary proceedings must be commenced within six months from the date of the

offence. It has been said that, as such, they must be strictly construed: Morgans v DPP

[1999] 1 WLR 968 at 983D-E in a passage considered further below. However, I do not

see that this in itself requires the court to do anything other than to give the provisions

their natural meaning as to the point at which the six-month period begins to run.

23. The provision for a prosecutor’s certificate to be conclusive evidence does, however,

require a strict approach. A conclusive evidence provision prevents the court, subject to

very limited exceptions, from enquiring whether the fact certified is or is not correct.

Accordingly, if it is to be given conclusive effect, the certificate must comply strictly with

the statutory requirements for such a certificate. It must certify the fact referred to in

section 41 of the regulations and not some other fact, and it must be signed by or on

behalf of the correct person or body (“the prosecutor”). This has been held to be the

position in a number of cases to which I refer below and is a principle applicable to

conclusive evidence provisions generally. The rationale is that Parliament has provided

that a certificate which fulfils certain requirements shall be conclusive, but has not so

provided in the case of a certificate which does not fulfil those requirements.

24. Reliance on cases dealing with a very different context, such as Privacy International,

does not in my judgment take matters further. While in one sense it can be said that

allowing the prosecution to issue a conclusive certificate may be to place undue power in

the hands of the state, it is well established that a certificate will not be conclusive if it is

issued in bad faith (not suggested here). Moreover, the context is merely as to the time for

commencing summary proceedings which is in any event subject to the three-year long

stop, while there is no comparable time limit in the case of much more serious offences

triable on indictment in the Crown Court. The time limit in the Regulations does not

involve the same considerations as apply when fundamental human rights are in play. The

consequence of certifying that proceedings are in time is not particularly startling. It is

merely that the defendant faces summary proceedings in the magistrates’ court to which

the common law and Article 6 guarantee of a fair trial applies.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

25. Accordingly, while I accept that a certificate must comply strictly with the statutory

requirements if it is to constitute conclusive evidence, that is to say it must be signed by

or on behalf of the appropriate prosecutor and must state what it is required to state, and

that a certificate which fails to do so is a nullity, there is in my judgment no greater scope

for a defendant to invoke policy considerations to challenge a certificate which is valid on

its face.

26. On the contrary, as the cases discussed below explain, there are powerful policy

considerations in favour of upholding the conclusive nature of such a certificate. To do so

promotes certainty which is in the interests of all parties, avoids the court having to

second-guess prosecutorial judgments which are properly the province of the CPS, and

avoids satellite litigation about whether proceedings have been commenced in time which

causes additional expense while determination of the real issue, whether an offence has

been committed, is delayed well beyond the time within which it ought to be determined.

Language

27. The date on which the six-month period begins is that stated in paragraph (1)(b) of

section 41, namely “the date on which evidence which the prosecutor thinks is sufficient

to justify the proceedings comes to the prosecutor’s knowledge”. It is evident that this

calls for an exercise of judgment on the part of the prosecutor (“sufficient to justify”); that

the question is at least primarily subjective (“which the prosecutor thinks”), so that on any

given facts there may be room for different prosecutors to take different views; and that

the date is determined by “the prosecutor’s knowledge” as distinct from some other event.

Moreover, the background against which such a provision has to be interpreted is that

whether proceedings are justified always depends on two factors, namely whether the

evidence amounts to a prima facie case and whether proceedings are in the public interest

or (which is the same thing) the interests of justice.

28. What the prosecutor is entitled to certify under paragraph (2) is the date on which “such

evidence” (that is to say evidence which the prosecutor thinks is sufficient to justify the

proceedings), came to his or her knowledge. The date on which this occurred is the “fact”

of which a valid certificate is to be conclusive evidence. This will usually, but need not

necessarily, be the same as the date on which the prosecutor formed the opinion that

proceedings were justified.

29. These considerations suggest to me that as a straightforward matter of language: (1) the

“fact” which has to be certified is the date on which something happens; (2) the thing

which has to happen is that certain evidence comes to the prosecutor’s knowledge; (3) the

evidence must be that which the prosecutor thinks is sufficient to justify proceedings, so

that what matters is the individual prosecutor’s subjective assessment; and (4) the

assessment which the prosecutor has to make concerns both limbs of the test, that is to

say whether there is a prima facie case and whether proceedings are in the public interest.

The authorities

30. I turn next to the authorities to see to what extent they support or negate these

conclusions, and what they have to say in particular about the grounds on which a

certificate can be challenged. It may be noted that the authorities to which I shall refer

address (among other things) five distinct questions, namely:

(1) Whose knowledge counts as the knowledge of the prosecutor (“the prosecutor

issue”)?

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

(2) What has to happen to cause the six-month period to begin to run (“the relevant date

issue”)?

(3) On what grounds can a certificate be challenged (“the grounds issue”)?

(4) What is the correct procedure for challenging a certificate (“the procedural issue”)?

(5) What is the relationship between such a challenge and an application to stay for abuse

of process (“the abuse issue”)?

31. It is convenient to start with Woodward, an appeal to this court by way of case stated in

which the issue was whether proceedings had been commenced in time in accordance

with section 31 of the Animal Welfare Act 2006. After referring to a number of

authorities Hickinbottom LJ set out at [23] a series of propositions which he regarded as

clear. For present purposes the following summary will suffice:

(1) The decision which the prosecutor has to make is not merely whether the evidence

amounts to a prima facie case, but also whether it is in the interests of justice to bring

proceedings: RSPCA v Johnson [2009] EWHC 2702 (Admin) at [33]; Letherbarrow v

Warwickshire County Council [2014] EWHC 4820 (Admin) at [17]; Riley v DPP

[2016] EWHC 2531 (Admin) at [17]; Woodward at [23(ii)].

(2) This requires careful consideration, so that a prosecutor is entitled to a reasonable

time to make the decision even after evidence amounting to a prima facie case has

been obtained (Woodward at [23(iii)]). As Hickinbottom put it, citing Letherbarrow at

[17]:

“the relevant date is the date upon which the prosecutor

considers that, upon the available evidence, it is in the public

interest to prosecute the particular individual or individuals.”

(3) There is a well established distinction between an investigator and a prosecutor. In the

context of animal welfare, the FSA is the investigator and the CPS is the prosecutor,

but evidence coming to the prosecutor’s knowledge refers to the knowledge of the

individual prosecutor to whom the case is allocated (Letherbarrow at [19]; Riley at

[15]; Woodward at [23(iv)]).

(4) The burden is on the prosecution to show that the proceedings have been commenced

in time. This may be done in either of two ways, namely (a) by relying on a

prosecutor’s certificate or alternatively (b) by adducing evidence of fact as to the

knowledge of the relevant prosecutor (Letherbarrow at [20]; Woodward at [23(vi)]).

(5) When the prosecution relies on a certificate, it must comply strictly with the statutory

requirements and must do so on its face, in the sense that deficiencies cannot be

remedied by reference to extrinsic evidence (Burwell v DPP [2009] EWHC 1069

(Admin) at [22] and [23]; Azam v Epping Forest District Council [2009] EWHC 3177

(Admin) at [25(3)]; RSPCA v King [2010] EWHC 637 (Admin) at [9]; Woodward at

[23(vii)(a)]).

(6) A certificate which does comply with those requirements “is determinative of the

matter unless the certificate is inaccurate on its face (i.e. plainly wrong on its face and

patently misleading), or can be shown to be fraudulent” (R v Haringey Magistrates’

Court, ex parte Amvrosiou (13th June 1996); Burwell at [18] and [19]; Azam at [25(4)

and (5)]; Woodward at [23(vii)(b)]).

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

(7) A defective certificate is a nullity. However, where a defective certificate is issued,

there is nothing to prevent the prosecutor from subsequently issuing a further

certificate which will be conclusive evidence of the relevant date if it complies with

the statutory requirements (Woodward at [23(viii) and (ix)]).

(8) Where there is no valid certificate, the court must determine on all the available

evidence whether the prosecution was brought in time (Azam at [25(1)]; Woodward at

[23(x)]).

32. In view of the issues in the present case, it is necessary to examine some of these cases

further, in particular those which support the sixth of these propositions. I shall take them

chronologically, beginning with Amvrosiou, a road traffic case. Having set out the

provisions of section 6 of the Road Traffic Act 1988, Auld LJ continued:

“17. Ms Gumbel, who appears on behalf of the Applicant,

submitted that the Magistrates were wrong to rule that they

could not hear evidence going behind the certificate as to the

date on which there was evidence sufficient for the prosecutor

to mount these proceedings. She frankly conceded that there are

no reported authorities giving guidance on the interpretation of

section 6(3). However, she drew our attention to decisions in

other contexts on the meaning of “conclusive evidence”. She

referred us to a number of cases of contract and of public

record where the courts have had to consider how conclusive

the evidence is wherever a dispute arises as to underlying

matters. They show in the main a resolve by the court to give

the predictable effect to those words. A good indication of the

general approach is to be found in the judgment of Simonds J in

Kerr v Mottram Limited [1940] Ch 657 where the term

‘conclusive evidence’ was considered in the context of the

articles of association of a company. Simonds J said at page

660:

‘I have no doubt that the words “conclusive evidence” mean

what they say; that they are to be a bar to any evidence being

tendered to show that the statements in the minutes are not

correct.’

18. Ms Gumbel sought to distinguish that and the other

authorities, to which she helpfully referred us, by reference to

the fact that in the contract cases the conclusiveness of

evidence was clearly the mutual intention of the parties, and in

the cases of public record there was a public interest or an

interest of a third party to be considered for whom certainty in

such matters is important. She submitted that in the context of a

prosecution of an individual there are different

consideration. She maintained that the original six-month

period for issuing proceedings should be given certainty, and

that an extension of that time limit however achieved, in this

instance by certification, on a basis that is not justified on the

facts should be open to investigation by Magistrates.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

19. Mr McGuinness, adopting the words of Simonds J in Kerr v

Mottram, submitted that the subsection means what it says, that

the certificate is conclusive evidence and that if a court,

whether a magistrates court or this court, were to look at

evidence put forward as capable of unseating the certificate the

word ‘conclusive’ would have no meaning. He submitted that

there were only two possible exceptions: (i) where it is plain

that there has been fraud, and (ii) where the certificate is wrong

or arguably wrong on its face.

20. He referred to a helpful summary of the law which is set out

in volume 17 of the current edition of Halsbury’s Laws, at

paragraph 28, which has the side heading: “Prima facie,

sufficient and conclusive evidence”. As to ‘conclusive

evidence’ it reads:

‘Conclusive evidence means that no contrary evidence will be

effective to displace it, unless the so-called conclusive evidence

is inaccurate on its face, or fraud can be shown.’

21. It is not suggested here that the certificate can be said to be

inaccurate on its face, and no fraud is alleged.

22. The clear purpose of section 6(3) is to achieve certainty,

both for the prosecutor and for the defendant, and to prevent

what would otherwise be an exercise in discovery of the

prosecuting process as to when a particular information came to

hand and as to when decisions as to its sufficiency could or

should have been made. Clearly any such possibility in the

context of this sort of provision would be an intolerable burden

to the prosecution and a cog on the wheels of justice at

summary level.

23. It has to be remembered, too, that the test in section 6(1) is

whether the date on which evidence ‘sufficient in the opinion of

the prosecutor to warrant the proceedings has come to his

knowledge’. As in many other matters concerning the

prosecution of offences there is a margin of judgment given to

the prosecutor. In my view, there is no way of going behind

section 6(3) as suggested by Ms Gumbel so as to negate its

clear provision that a certificate for this purpose is conclusive,

save possibly in the two exceptional cases to which I have

referred.”

33. As the certificate in Amvrosiou was not inaccurate on its face and there was no suggestion

of fraud, evidence which was said to show that the certificate was wrong was immaterial.

34. Accordingly Amvrosiou explains the policy justification for giving effect to a certificate

which is valid on its face, emphasises that what matters is the “sufficiency” of evidence

including consideration of the public interest in prosecuting, and allows for the possibility

of only two exceptions to the validity of a certificate which is valid on its face.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

35. The next case is Morgans, which contains at 983D-E the passage referred to above to the

effect that the provisions must be strictly construed. The case decided that the words

“sufficient in the opinion of the prosecutor to warrant the proceedings” in section 11(2) of

the Computer Misuse Act 1990 were merely descriptive of the evidence and did not

require the prosecutor to form his opinion before time began to run; accordingly time

began to run once the prosecutor had all the material on which the prosecution was

eventually brought. Kennedy LJ said:

“Mr Blackman contends that the words ‘sufficient in the

opinion of the prosecutor to warrant the proceedings’ are

merely descriptive of the evidence, and that the prosecutor

would not have to form his opinion before time begins to run. I

accept that submission because otherwise the prosecutor, in full

possession of all relevant information, can prevent time from

running simply by not applying his mind to the case.

Section 11 is an exception to the normal rule that summary

offences should be prosecuted within six months. As an

exception in favour of the prosecution it should be strictly

construed. The draftsman could have provided that proceedings

for an offence under subsection (1) ‘may be brought within a

period of six months from the date on which the prosecution

forms the opinion that there is sufficient evidence to warrant

proceedings’ but he did not do so.”

36. Thus the relevant date is the date on which the prosecutor has evidence which is sufficient

in his opinion to warrant the proceedings, even if he or she has not yet formed that

opinion. However, Morgans says nothing about what matters need to be taken into

account as being relevant to the question whether there is sufficient evidence to warrant

the proceedings. In particular, there is nothing to suggest that the question whether a

prosecution is in the interests of justice does not need to be considered.

37. More fundamentally, it appears that Amvrosiou was not cited to the court in Morgans and

there was no explanation of why the certificate in that case was not conclusive. The point

was dealt with very shortly. Accordingly, the case deals with what I have called “the

relevant date issue” but does not address at all “the grounds issue”.

38. In Burwell, a case under the Computer Misuse Act 1990, the defendant sought to go

behind a prosecutor’s certificate in order to show that the police had acquired sufficient

evidence to prosecute more than six months before the date stated in the certificate. This

court rejected a submission that to allow the prosecution to issue a certificate which

would effectively exclude enquiry as to the true facts was contrary to principle and to the

rule of law. Keene LJ cited Amvrosiou with approval, pointing out at [15] that it had not

been cited in Morgans and commenting at [19] that he preferred the reasoning in

Amvrosiou to that in Morgans and that the absence of any consideration of the conclusive

evidence provisions weakened the authority of Morgans. He added:

“20. I would emphasise, however that that does not mean that a

prosecutor can simply stall the start of proceedings, or use a

certificate to present a date which is patently misleading. The

first exception referred to by Auld LJ would seem to

encompass the situation where the certificate is plainly (even if

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

honestly) inaccurate, so that the decision of the prosecutor to

certify would itself be amenable to challenge by way of judicial

review on the usual grounds, or challengeable before the

magistrates’ court as an abuse of their process. But the

certificate would have to be plainly wrong. The prosecutor is

entitled to a degree of judgment as to when there is sufficient

evidence available to warrant a prosecution. That, after all, is

the purpose on the face of it of section 11(2).”

39. However, the certificate in Burwell was defective and therefore not conclusive.

40. The passage cited introduces the concept of a certificate being “plainly wrong”, so that it

could be challenged by a judicial review “on the usual grounds”. It is fair to say that until

the decision in Lamont-Perkins v RSPCA [2012] EWHC 1002 (Admin) discussed below,

there was some uncertainty as to the correct procedure for challenging a certificate.

However, it is important to keep in mind the distinction between the grounds on which a

challenge can be made to a certificate (what I have called “the grounds issue”) and the

procedure for making a challenge (the “procedural issue”). The passage also contemplates

an application to stay proceedings as an abuse of process, which raises separate

considerations, for example if a prosecutor has deliberately stalled the start of

proceedings. However, I cannot read this passage, which is premised on approval of

Amvrosiou, as permitting a challenge to a certificate on the basis that a certificate is

shown to be “plainly wrong” by reference to extraneous evidence. That would be directly

contrary to what Amvrosiou decided. To read the passage as support for such a wider

ground of challenge would be to place far too much weight on the (with respect)

somewhat vague reference to “the usual grounds” for judicial review.

41. It is significant, however, that the court in Burwell saw no objection on policy grounds to

the conclusive nature of a certificate which was valid on its face, and that as well as

approving Amvrosiou, it recognised that the prosecutor is entitled to a degree of judgment

in deciding when the evidence is sufficient to justify the commencement of proceedings.

42. Johnson was mainly concerned with the identity of the prosecutor (“the prosecutor

issue”), but Pill LJ cited the passage from Amvrosiou as a correct statement of the law at

[18] and [25]. The prosecuting body in Johnson was the RSPCA, but the individual who

had signed the certificate was a Prosecution Case Manager who had signed in that

capacity. Pill LJ held that the certificate was valid and conclusive, subject to arguments

about abuse of process. What mattered for the purpose of commencement of the six-

month time limit was not when the relevant knowledge could be said to have reached the

RSPCA, but when it had reached the individual who was responsible for exercising a

judgment whether it was sufficient to justify a prosecution:

“33. There is no principle of law that knowledge in a prosecutor

begins immediately any employee of the prosecutor has the

relevant knowledge, and Donnachie [2007] EWHC 1846

(Admin) is not establish one. It is right that prosecutors are not

entitled to shuffle papers between officers or sit on information

so as to extend a time limit. There is, however, a degree of

judgment involved in bringing a prosecution, and knowledge,

in my judgment, involves an opportunity for those with

appropriate skills to consider whether there is sufficient

information to justify a prosecution.”

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

43. The case recognises that shuffling papers or sitting on information may constitute an

abuse of process, although it was held that this was not what had happened. Accordingly

there was no abuse of process and the certificate, which was valid on its face, was

conclusive.

44. The reasoning and decision in Amvrosiou were followed in Azam, where it was described

by Cranston J as “the seminal case”. Cranston J set out a series of principles derived from

the authorities which included:

“(4) A valid certificate is determinative of the matter

unless the certificate is inaccurate on its face, or can be

shown to be fraudulent.

(5) The exception for a certificate inaccurate on its face

applies only when the certificate is plainly, even if

honestly, wrong. It must be patently misleading.”

45. This is further support for the limited basis on which a certificate can be challenged. It

shows that Cranston J read the reference in Burwell to a certificate being “plainly wrong”

in the same way as I would read it, that is to say to a certificate which is wrong on its

face.

46. In King, Toulson LJ referred at [9] to the “limited qualifications recognised in the case

law” to the conclusive nature of the certificate, which in context is a clear reference to the

qualifications (or exceptions) recognised in Amvrosiou.

47. In Lamont-Perkins Wyn Williams J cited the passage from Amvrosiou set out above and

acknowledged at [32] that it had been followed in Burwell, Azam and Johnson. He

continued:

“35. On the basis of the decisions in Amvrosiou, Burwell and

Azam it seems to me to be clear that a certificate issued under

section 31(2) of the 2006 Act which conforms to the criteria

specified in section 31(2) can be challenged on two bases

alone. First, it can be challenged on the basis that it constitutes

a fraud; second, it can be challenged on the basis that it is

plainly wrong. The phrase ‘patently misleading’ is not, in my

judgment, an additional basis upon which a certificate can be

challenged; it is simply a phrase used in the judgment of Keene

LJ and Cranston J in Burwell and Azam respectively to

reinforce the notion that the certificates must be plainly wrong

before it can be challenged.”

48. I would respectfully agree that the phrase “patently misleading” is not an additional

ground of challenge. Rather it sheds light on what is meant by saying that a certificate

must be “plainly wrong”. The significance of the word “patently” is that the certificate

must be inaccurate on its face (the inaccuracy must be “patent”) if it is to be successfully

challenged.

49. This too is explicit support for the limited nature of the grounds on which a certificate can

be challenged.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

50. Mr Hockman suggested that some doubt is cast on this by some later comments of Wyn

Williams J in Lamont-Perkins, where he said:

“42. The decision in Azam appears to be authority for the

proposition that a challenge to a certificate may be made only

by way of judicial review or by application for a stay on the

grounds of abuse of process – see paragraph 25(6) of the

judgment as set out in paragraph 32 above. Further, it appears

to decide that abuse of process can be made out only where the

prosecutor has manipulated or misused the process so that a

person is deprived of the time bar. Some form of misconduct is

involved – see paragraph 25(7).

43. I find it difficult to see how [sc. to reconcile the fact that] a

certificate issued under section 31(2) is susceptible to challenge

on the grounds that it is plainly wrong (albeit that the mistake

can be innocent) with the suggestion that if it is challenged on

the basis that an abuse of process has occurred in which some

form of misconduct is involved. No real difficulty arises if it is

challenged by way of judicial review. In such a challenge it

would be possible to argue unreasonableness or irrationality,

which, in context, would be likely to be very similar to if not

identical with the notion that the certificate was plainly wrong.

However, to repeat, if the approach in Azam is followed a

challenge before the magistrates’ court would appear to require

proof of some kind of misconduct.

44. The divergence in approach depending upon whether the

challenge is brought by way of judicial review or by way of an

allegation of abuse of process may, at first sight, appear

interesting but unlikely to have much practical consequence.

That is not the case, however, if the Appellant and Respondent

are correct that the Respondent (or any other private

prosecutor) is not susceptible to a challenge by way of judicial

review and that the only mechanism for challenging a

certificate issued by a private prosecutor is before the

magistrates’ court.

45. The difficulty identified in the preceding paragraph arises

only if a challenge before the magistrates is permitted only on

the grounds that an abuse of process has occurred. As is clear,

however, in cases such as Atkinson, in particular, the challenge

before the court has been a challenge to its jurisdiction.

46. In my judgment a magistrates’ court has no jurisdiction to

hear a summons alleging offences under the 2006 Act if the

information upon which the summons is based was laid outside

the time limit permitted by section 31(1). If no certificate under

section 31(2) is issued by the prosecutor there can be no

possible objection to an accused person challenging the

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

jurisdiction of the court by asserting that the prosecutor has not

laid an information within the time specified in section 31(1).

47. I can discern no principled basis for concluding that such a

procedure is not open to an accused person if the prosecutor has

issued a certificate under section 31(2) of the Act. A certificate

under section 31(2) is conclusive evidence of the facts stated

therein unless it is demonstrated that the certificate is plainly

wrong. If the certificate is plainly wrong it has no effect and the

magistrates must disregard it. They will then be left to

determine whether or not the prosecutor has initiated

proceedings within the time limit permitted by section 31(1)

and if he has not the magistrates will have no jurisdiction to

hear the summons in question.

48. I acknowledge that this approach is not the one which was

suggested as appropriate in Burwell and Azam and endorsed in

RSPCA v Johnson. However, the procedural issues raised in

this case were not raised in any of those cases. Further, so far as

I am aware, Atkinson was not cited in any of those cases. For

my part, I consider the reasoning in the judgment of Auld LJ in

Atkinson to be compelling.”

51. These comments were solely concerned with the procedure for challenging a certificate

and with the question of abuse of process, not with the grounds on which such a challenge

might succeed. The potential grounds of challenge had already been addressed by Wyn

Williams J at [35] (set out above) and were limited in accordance with Amvrosiou and the

cases which had followed it. The point of these later comments, as the reference to

Atkinson v DPP [2004] EWHC 1457 (Admin) makes clear, was that the challenge could

be made in the magistrates’ court itself and that a successful application would mean that

the magistrates’ court had no jurisdiction to continue. In saying that a certificate was

conclusive unless it was “plainly wrong” it is reasonably clear, in my judgment, that what

Wyn Williams J had in mind was a certificate which was plainly wrong on its face. That

was what the cases which he cited had held. If (which I doubt) he intended to hold that a

certificate could be challenged in judicial review proceedings as “plainly wrong” by

reference to extraneous evidence, that was contrary in my judgment to the cases which he

had previously cited as authoritative.

52. I can see no justification here for widening the scope of the concept of “plainly wrong” to

permit an enquiry into extraneous facts. To do so would be to lose all the benefits of

certainty which were held in Amvrosiou to be the clear purpose of such provisions and

would introduce the “intolerable burden to the prosecution and a cog on the wheels of

justice at summary level” to which Auld LJ referred.

53. Letherbarrow was another case concerned with the prosecutor issue, which followed and

applied Johnson. The prosecutor was the council, but the person whose knowledge was

relevant for the purpose of the time bar provision was the individual who had

responsibility for “making the important decision whether to prosecute”, a decision which

was not merely “whether there is a prima facie case but whether the evidence is sufficient

to justify a prosecution”, a question which involved “a consideration of what is in the

interests of justice”:

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

“although the prosecutor in the case as a whole is the collective

body (here, the County Council), it is the individual with

responsibility for deciding whether a prosecution should go

forward whose thoughts and beliefs are relevant.”

54. Mr Hockman relied also on what was said about delay by Gross LJ in Riley:

“19. … this separation of the roles between investigators and

prosecutors is not a charter for paper-shuffling, as Pill LJ

observed in Johnson’s case. In a case such as this, time starts

running under section 31(1)(b) of the Act once a suitably

qualified Crown Prosecution Service employee has knowledge

of ‘evidence which the prosecutor thinks is sufficient to justify

the proceedings …’ Internal Crown Prosecution Service delays

or transfers of the file will not serve to extend time under that

subsection – and the three year ‘long stop’ provision under

section 31(1)(a) will not avail a prosecutor where relevant

delay has exceeded the six-month period specified in section

31(1)(b).”

55. However, as Gross LJ had already pointed out at [12], the short point on which the case

turned was whether the FSA or the CPS was to be regarded as “the prosecutor” for the

purpose of the relevant provisions. Moreover, he went on to observe at [20] that on the

facts of the case, there was nothing to undermine the CPS certificate. Accordingly the

nature of the grounds on which such a certificate could be challenged was not an issue in

the case and there is nothing in the judgment to call in question, or even comment on, the

principles set out above.

56. Finally, in Woodward the first certificate was defective, but the prosecutor had issued a

second certificate which was valid on its face. This court held that the District Judge was

wrong to consider the validity of this second certificate by reference to extraneous

evidence. Hickinbottom LJ said at [29]:

“In considering the later certificates, he erred in taking into

account extraneous evidence, namely what had been said in the

March certificate. He ought to have considered the July 2016

certificates on their face, and asked himself whether there was

anything patently wrong with them or whether they were

fraudulent. There was, and is, no suggestion of fraud. Nor, in

my judgment, was there anything clearly wrong on their face.”

57. This is, therefore, a clear decision confirming that, in the absence of fraud, extraneous

evidence is not admissible to challenge a certificate which is valid on its face. In my

judgment the cases which I have cited make good the proposition that a valid certificate

(i.e. signed by the right person and saying the right thing) is determinative of the relevant

date unless the certificate is inaccurate on its face (i.e. plainly wrong on its face), or can

be shown to be fraudulent.

Conclusions

58. In my judgment policy, language and authority lead firmly to the following conclusions

which are decisive of this case.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

59. First, although the prosecutor is the CPS, the relevant individual with responsibility for

deciding whether to commence proceedings was Ms Sanghera. It is therefore her

knowledge which counts for the purpose of section 41 of the Regulations. Mr Hockman’s

submission that time began to run from the date when the file was received by the CPS is

untenable in view of the authorities which address the prosecutor issue.

60. Second, the decision whether the evidence was sufficient to justify proceedings which Ms

Sanghera had to make required an exercise of judgment on her part, both as to whether

the evidence amounted to a prima facie case and whether proceedings were in the public

interest. However, the statutory question was when evidence which in her opinion

satisfied those criteria came to her knowledge, and not (if different) when she formed the

opinion that proceedings were justified. The date on which the relevant evidence came to

her knowledge is not, however, to be equated with the date on which the relevant

evidence was placed on her desk or delivered to her inbox. Rather it is the date on or by

which it has been considered so that knowledge of the content has been imparted. In most

cases, no doubt, and there is no reason to suppose that this case is different, that imparting

of knowledge and the forming of opinion will happen together. The responsible

individual will review the file and make a decision about prosecution. Hypothetically,

however, if he or she were to review the file so as to have knowledge of all the relevant

evidence, but only made a decision about prosecution at a later date, it seems to me that

the date when the file was reviewed would be the date when the evidence came to the

prosecutor’s knowledge. To that limited extent, therefore, I respectfully disagree with

Hickinbottom LJ’s statement in Woodward at [23(iii)] that the relevant date is the date on

which the prosecutor decides that it is in the public interest to prosecute.

61. Third, a prosecutor’s certificate is not merely conclusive evidence of the date when

particular pieces of evidence came to the prosecutor’s knowledge. A certificate in proper

form is conclusive evidence of the relevant date from which the six-month period begins

to run.

62. Fourth, in the absence of fraud, a certificate in proper form which contains no error on its

face is conclusive evidence of that date and is not open to challenge by reference to

extraneous evidence showing that it is wrong or even plainly wrong. To hold otherwise

would depart from a clear and consistent line of authority which rests on sound principles.

It would lead to endless arguments as to whether the date stated on a certificate was

“plainly wrong” or just “wrong” and what was meant to be added by the word “plainly”.

The facts of this case demonstrate all too clearly the good sense of this conclusion.

Proceedings which were commenced in January 2018 have become bogged down in a

dispute whether the proceedings are time barred and the court has jurisdiction. The delay

of which the claimant complains, four months and 11 days between the initial receipt of

the case by the CPS and the first review of the file, pales into insignificance when

compared with the time which has been taken to resolve the time bar issue.

63. Accordingly the prosecutor’s certificate in this case contains no error on its face and is

therefore conclusive evidence that the relevant date was 8th November 2017. The

proceedings were therefore in time. Evidence to the contrary suggesting that the relevant

knowledge was acquired on some earlier date (the claimant says March 2017) is

inadmissible. Equally, although there was some suggestion that the actual date on which

the evidence justifying proceedings came to Ms Sanghera’s knowledge may have been in

early January 2018 rather than 8th November 2017, that too is inadmissible.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

Ground 1: the District Judge was wrong to deal with the matter as if it were an

application to stay the proceedings for abuse of process

64. Mr Hockman submitted that the District Judge was wrong to deal with the matter as if it

were an application to stay for abuse of process on the basis that the claimant could not

have a fair trial. In fact the challenge was to the jurisdiction of the court on the ground

that the prosecution was time-barred. The difference in some cases could be important

because the burden of proof is different. In the latter case, the burden is on the

prosecution to show that the prosecution is not time-barred, although in practice the

burden of proof is not significant where there is a valid prosecutor’s certificate stating

conclusively that the relevant date was a date less than six months before the

commencement of proceedings.

65. As already indicated, I do not accept that the District Judge did deal with the matter as if

it were an abuse application. She began by noting that the prosecution relied on a

certificate and that there was no issue as to the validity of the second certificate which Ms

Sanghera had issued. She referred to the claimant’s argument that the court was entitled

to examine the chronology of events notwithstanding the certificate and to the case law,

including in particular Woodward. She observed that the certificate relied on was not

“defective on its face or fraudulent”, either of which would mean that it was not

conclusive and concluded:

“I regard the certificate of 5th April as conclusive evidence of

the matters stated in it in accordance with r 41(2).”

66. This reasoning was all directed to the issue of time bar, addressed the questions discussed

in the case law, and reached a clear conclusion.

67. The District Judge then continued:

“I have, however, gone on to consider the chronology and the

arguments put forward as to the history of the case prior to the

date of the certificate to examine whether a fair trial can take

place.”

68. It may be that it was unnecessary for the District Judge to go on to consider abuse of

process if there was no application before her to stay the proceedings on this ground, but

it is understandable that she should have done so and in any event it is clear that this was

an additional and distinct issue.

Ground 4: the proceedings should have been stayed as an abuse of process

69. I can deal with the question of abuse of process shortly. The District Judge concluded that

despite the “disappointing” and “regrettable” delay between receipt of the file on 13th

March 2017 and the first case review on 24th July 2017 a fair trial remained possible. That

was a conclusion which she was entitled to reach and with which I agree. There is,

moreover, no reason to suppose that there was anything approaching deliberate

manipulation of the time limit or that it is in any way unfair for the case to proceed.

70. Mr Hockman submitted that if, on the evidence available, it is clear that the prosecutor’s

certificate mis-states the date when sufficient evidence came to the prosecutor’s

knowledge, that would mean that the certificate was “plainly wrong” and that it would be

an abuse of process for the proceedings to continue. I would reject that submission. As

the cases make clear, whether a certificate is “plainly wrong” must be determined, in the

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court

absence of fraud, by reference to the face of the certificate and without regard to

extraneous evidence. Absent fraud, a certificate which is valid on its face is conclusive

evidence of the relevant date. If it were possible to circumvent this principle by dressing

up a challenge to the certificate as an abuse of process argument, the purpose of the time

bar provisions would be frustrated.

71. Abuse of process may have a role to play in an appropriate case. That may be so, even in

a case where there is a conclusive certificate, for example if a prosecutor’s failure to

apply his or her mind to the sufficiency of evidence led to a delay which impacted on the

fairness of the proceedings. That, no doubt, is the kind of consideration which courts have

had in mind in emphasising that the conclusive evidence provisions must not be

manipulated to deprive a defendant of the benefit of a time-bar defence and are “not a

charter for paper-shuffling” (e.g. Johnson at [25] and Riley at [19]). But abuse of process

is and should remain a separate question concerned with the fairness of the procedure and

of the trial.

Disposal

72. For these reasons I would dismiss the claim for judicial review.

Mrs Justice Jefford:

73. I agree.

ORDER

UPON HEARING COUNSEL FOR THE CLAIMANT AND COUNSEL FOR THE

INTERESTED PARTY AT A HEARING OF THE CLAIM FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

ON 17 OCTOBER 2019

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

1. The claim for judicial review is dismissed.

2. The Claimant is to pay the Interested Party’s costs of the claim for judicial review in

the sum of £12,202.

3. Payment of costs to be made within 28 days of this Order.

Dated this day 6th day of November 2019

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Chesterfield Poultry Ltd v Sheffield Magistrates Court