Neutral Citation Number:  [2024] EWHC 3341 (Admin)  
 
Case No: AC-2024 -LON -001728  
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE  
KING'S BENCH DIVISION  
DIVISIONAL COURT  
 
Royal Courts of Justice  
Strand, London, WC2A 2LL  
 
Date: 20/12/2024   
 
Before : 
 
LORD JUSTICE JEREMY BAKER  
MR JUSTICE JAY  
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Between:  
 
 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS  
 Appellant  
 - and – 
  
 JOANN JINKS  Respondent  
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
James Boyd  (instructed by  CPS Appeals and Review Unit ) for the  Claimant  
Philip Rule KC and Ian Bridge  (instructed by Jonas Roy Bloom ) for the Respon dent 
 
Hearing date: 17 December 2024  
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Approved Judgment  
  
This judgment was handed down remotely at 10.30am on 20 December 2024 by circulation 
to the parties or their representatives by e -mail and by release to the National Archives.  
 
.............................  
 
MR JUSTICE JAY

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  DPP v Jinks  
 
 
Draft  23 December 2024  12:56  Page 2 MR JUSTICE JAY:  
 
INTRODUCTION  
1. This is the judgment of the Court.  
2. The Director of Public Prosecution s (“the Appell ant”) appeals by way of case stated 
against the decision of Deputy Chief Magistrate Tanweer Ikram (“the Judge”) sitting at 
Westminster Magistrates’ Court (“the Court”) on 23 August 2022 to dismiss the 
prosecution of Ms Joann Jinks (“the Respondent”) on the  basis that the proceedings 
were brought out of time.  
3. The Respondent was charged with three counts of sending a grossly offensive message 
by a public electronic communications network, contrary to section 127 of the 
Communications Act 2003 (“the 2003 Act”). The charges related to what were alleged 
to be racist images sent by her to her co -defendant and fellow serving police officer, 
Mr James Wat ts, in June 2020.  
4. The Judge dismissed the charge on the basis that the relevant date for the purpose of 
the time limit  for bringing proceedings in section 127(5)(b) of the 2003 Act was more 
than six months before the institution of proceedings in the Court. In a nutshell, the 
issue for our determination is whether the judge was correct so to conclude .  
 
THE FACTS  
5. We take the relevant facts largely from the case stated prepared by the Judge .  
6. On 18 May 2021 a case file was referred by the Independent Office of Police Conduct 
(“the IOPC”) to the CPS. On 14 June 2021 a Senior Crown Prosecutor (“the first 
prosecutor”) reviewed the file and concluded that there was insufficient evidence to 
bring proceedings. That decision was subsequently challenged by the IOPC in 
accordance with the pre -trial decision appeals process, and the matter was referred to 
the CPS for reconside ration. On 18 October 2021 another Senior Crown Prosecutor 
(“the second prosecut or”) considered the same material  and concluded that there was 
sufficient evidence to institute proceedings and that it was in the public interest to do 
so: in other words, that the full code test was fulfilled.  
7. After the taking of further steps  which are not relevant to these proceedings, on 3 March 
2022 the matter was referred to the CPS Special Crime Team for charging authority to 
be provided under  Crown Prosecution Service legal guidance regarding offences 
committed via social media. Charging authority was provided on 16 March 2022.  
8. Authorisation to charge both the Respondent and her co -defendant was provided to the 
IOPC on 25 March 2022, and postal requisitions were sent on 31 March 2022.  
9. The Respondent and her co -defendant appeared before Birmingham Magistrates ’ Court 
on 13 May 2022. The Respondent pleaded not guilty to the charges at the hearing. Her

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  DPP v Jinks  
 
 
Draft  23 December 2024  12:56  Page 3 co-defendant pleaded guilty to the ten charges relevant to him, and ultimately he 
received an immediate sentence of 20 weeks’ imprisonment.  
10. The Respondent’s case was adjourned for trial at Westminster Magistrates ’ Court on 
23 and 24 August 2022. At the hearing, it was argued for the Respondent that, for the 
purpose of section 127(5) of the 2003 Act, the relevant date  was the date on which the 
decision was taken to authorise no further action against her. In response, the Appellant 
argued that the decision to authorise no further action did not trigger the 6 -month time 
limit, as the prosecutor had decided that there was not sufficient evidence t o justify 
proceedings.  
11.  The Judge ruled that the relevant date was 14 June 2021, his reasoning being that it 
was: 
“… the date on which the evidence came to the knowledge of the 
“first” prosecutor, on the basis that this was the date on which 
the evidence first came to the notice of the prosecutor. While not 
determinative of my decision, the prosecution argument would 
allow continual reviews of the same bundle, though it is accepted 
that this could be grounds for abuse of process. On the basis that 
the “relevant date” was 14 June 2021, I ruled that the 
proceedings against the defendant Jinks had therefore been 
commenced  outside the 6 -month time limit.”  
 
THE JUDGE’S QUESTIONS FOR DETERMINATION BY THIS COURT  
12. The Judge posed the following two questions for our determination:  
“In context, a prosecutor later (18 October 2021) decided that the 
evidence that had, in fact, been available on 14 June 2021 was, 
in fact, sufficient to justify proceedings.  
For the purposes of Section 127(5) of the Act, does a decision, 
taken with knowledge of all relevant evidence, that the evidence 
is not sufficient to justify proceedings trigger the “relevant date” 
provisions even if a contrary view is taken upon the same 
evidence on a later date?  
Was I correct to rule that in those circumstances, the relevant 
date was 14 June 2021?”  
13. We mention in passing that the Respondent seeks to uphold the Judge’s decision on a 
further and a lternative  ground, and to that end has filed a Respondent’s Notice. 
However, we consider that the Respondent’s Notice is predicated on a misreading of 
section 111(1) of the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 leading to  an incorrect use of the 
case stated procedure: see the decision s of th is Court in R (oao Paul Bussetti) v DPP  
[2020] EWHC 3004 (Admin), at paras 21 -22 (per Carr LJ, as she then was) , and in 
Harvey v DPP  [2021] EWHC 147 (Admin); [2021] 1 WLR 2721 , at para 9  (per Lord 
Burnett CJ) . The effect of the sub -section is that the terms of the case stated bind this

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  DPP v Jinks  
 
 
Draft  23 December 2024  12:56  Page 4 Court to the extent that we can only answer the questions posed by the Judge; we cannot 
travel more widely into different issues or determine further facts. We therefore say no 
more about the Respondent’s Notice .  
 
RELEVANT LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS  
14. Section 127 of the 2003 Act provides, in material part:  
“(1) A person is guilty of an offence if he — 
(a) sends by means of a public electronic communications 
network a message or other matter that is grossly offensive or of 
an indecent, obscene or menacing character; or  
(b) causes any such message or matter to be so sent.  
… 
(3) A person guilty of an offence under this section shall be 
liable, on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the 
standard scale, or to both.  
… 
(5) An information or complaint relating to an offence under this 
section may be tried by a magistrates' court in England and 
Wales or Northern Ireland if it is laid or made — 
(a) before the end of the period of 3 years beginning with the day 
on which the offence was committed, and  
(b) before the end of the period of 6 months beginning with the 
day on which evidence comes to the knowledge of the prosecutor 
which the prosecutor considers sufficient to justify proceedings.  
… 
(7) A certificate of a prosecutor as to the date on which evidence 
described in subsection (5)(b) … came to his or her knowledge 
is conclusive evidence of that fact. ” 
15. The second prosecutor issued a certificate under section 127(5) but the parties are 
agreed that nothing turns upon its terms. However, as a matter of first impression we 
observe that the sub -section would be otiose if time started to run from the date of t he 
prosecutor’s decision to prosecute. That would always be known , or at least readily 
provable . Thus, the existence of the certification procedure indicates that the relevant 
date could be a different and earlier date known only to the prosecutor.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  DPP v Jinks  
 
 
Draft  23 December 2024  12:56  Page 5 THE COMPETING CONTENTION S 
16. Mr James Boyd for the Appellant submitted that we should accord a literal 
interpretation to the statutory wording unless it yielded an absurd result. In June 2021 
the first prosecutor was the “prosecutor” for the purposes of section 127(5). Although 
all th e relevant evidence came to her knowledge on 14 June 2021, it was not evidence 
that in her opinion was sufficient to justify proceedings. It lacked an essential 
characteristic. When the second prosecutor considered the matter afresh four months 
later, he w as a different “prosecutor” for the purposes of section 127(5). It followed that 
the statutory test for the running of time was not met. To construe the statutory wording 
differently would be tantamount to rewriting it.  
17. Mr Philip Rule KC for the Respondent invoked the well -established canon of statutory 
interpretation that any ambiguity should be resolved against the Appellant in the context 
of a penal provision. The relevant date for starting the notional clock was not the date 
a prosecutor decides to prosecute: if it were, he or she could simply delay coming to a 
decision until a date of his or her choosing. The relevant date is when an authorised  
individual, on these facts the first prosecutor, received the evidence and  considered it 
so that knowledge of its contents was imparted  to the CPS as an organisation . It is 
irrelevant for these purposes what decision the first prosecutor made as to whether to 
prosecute; or, put another way, that the first prosecutor decided not to prosecute. 
Although the second prosecutor was a different authorised individual, it was not his 
knowledge which began the notional clock. Time was already running because the first 
prosecutor had acquired knowledge for the purposes of the sub -section.  
18. Mr Rule accepted that time does not begin running for these purposes if the prosecutor 
advises that further inquiries or investigations be undertaken  that leads to further 
evidence . In the present case, however, it may clearly be inferred that no further 
inquiries were carried out  because the material evidence  did not change between June 
and October 2021. The IOPC did not appeal on the footing that further inquiries were 
necessary. The second prosecutor came to a different decision only because his 
evaluati on of the evidence was different from the first prosecutor’s, and not because 
something new had emerged.  
19. In a clear and persuasive oral argument, Mr Rule took us through the key authorities . 
We are grateful for his analysis.  
 
DISCUSSION  
20. Section 127(5) of the 2003 Act is not an isolated or unfamiliar provision. There are 
numerous examples in both primary and secondary legislation of similarly -worded 
provisions which are designed to constitute exceptions to the general rule that summary 
proceedings should be started within six months of the commission of the offence, and 
treat the prosecutor’s knowledge of X as triggering a different and later six -month time 
limit. For example, the formulation “evidence sufficient in the opinion of the 
prose cutor” appears in section 6 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988. The slightly 
different formulation, “evidence which the prosecutor thinks is sufficient to justify 
proceedings comes to his knowledge” appears in section 31 of the Animal Welfare Act 
2006,  and the almost identical, “evidence which the prosecutor thinks is sufficient to

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  DPP v Jinks  
 
 
Draft  23 December 2024  12:56  Page 6 justify the proceedings comes to the prosecutor’s knowledge” in regulation 41 of the 
Welfare of Animals at the Time of Killing (England) Regulations 2015  [SI No 2015 of 
1782] .  
21. Although there are minor differences in wording across the statutory landscape, we 
consider that these are immaterial and that a consistent approach should be adopted. It 
follows that the case law  cited to us which addressed these various  provisions , as well 
as others,  is germane to our consideration.  
22. The authorities address the following connected questions: the identity of the 
“prosecutor” for these purposes; the circumstances in which  a conclusive certificate 
may be challenged; and how to avoid the unattractive consequences of a prosecuting 
authority “shuffling the papers” in order  to extend time. The instant case is not 
concerned with the integrity of a prosecutorial certificate or the difficulties which arise 
in a case of arguably deliberate delay ing tactics . Both the first and second prosecutors 
made their decisions on the day the evidence came to their respective knowledge.  
23. We were referred to no authority which provides a conclusive answer to the questions 
posed by the Judge. The situation which has arisen is, we consider, relatively unusual.  
24. There is some authority supporting the proposition that the taking of the decision to 
prosecute is the relevant trigger  in the context of extended time limit provisions of this 
sort. In Leatherbarrow v Warwickshire County Council  [2014] EWHC 4820 (Admin); 
[2015] 179 J.P. 307 , the focus of Bean LJ’s reasoning was directed to  the decision to 
prosecute applying the test in the full code. In R v Woodward  [2017] EWHC 1008 
(Admin); [2017] 181 J.P. 405 Hickinbottom LJ held (at para 23(iii)) that the relevant 
date:  
“is the date upon which the prosecutor considers that, upon the 
available evidence, it is in the public interest to prosecute the 
particular individual or individuals”.  
25. If these dicta were correct, it would follow that time did not start running until 18 
October 2021.  However, Mr Boyd did not seek to support th ese decisions . He accepted, 
correctly in our view, that a more authoritative analysis is to be found elsewhere.  
26. Mr Rule accepted that knowledge for the purposes of section 127(5) cannot be acquired 
simply when the material evidence – by which we mean, evidence sufficient to fulfil 
the full code test – comes to the knowledge of the CPS as a whole. In this regard, 
knowledge must be acquired by the individual responsible for exercising a judgment 
whether that evidence was sufficient to justify a prosecution. There is a mass of 
authority supporting Mr Rule’s concession . These include Leatherbarrow  (per Bean LJ 
at para 19 ); R (Chesterfield Poultry Ltd) v Sheffield Magistrates’ Court  [2019] EWHC 
2953 (Admin); [2020] 1 WLR 499 (per Males LJ at para s 42 and  59); and Winder v 
DPP  [2020] EWHC 1611 (Admin) (per Dove J at para 23).  
27. At first blush, there is some force in Mr Boyd’s submission that, if “prosecutor” in the 
sub-section means “the individual”, what matters here is when the second prosecutor 
acquired knowledge of the evidence sufficient to justify a prosecut ion. One literal 
reading of the statutory wording supports that analysis , but in our view it is not the only 
possible reading.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  DPP v Jinks  
 
 
Draft  23 December 2024  12:56  Page 7 28. However, we have reached the conclusion that this reading is both inconsistent with 
authority and unsound on policy grounds. Our reasons are as follows.  
29. In Morgans v DPP  [1999] 1 WLR 968, this Court ( Kennedy  LJ and Sullivan J)  was 
considering the terms of a broadly similar limitation provision in section 11(2) of the 
Computer Misuse Act 1990. In that case, transposing the nomenclature we are 
deploying in the present case, the first prosecutor was a police officer and the second 
prosecutor was the CPS. By the end of January 1996, the police officer had all the 
material evidence on which the pros ecution was brought. He therefore submitted the 
file to the CPS for charging advice. The police officer then fell ill and a different police 
officer charged the defendant in August 1996. On 20 August the CPS prosecutor formed 
the opinion that he had sufficient evidence to warrant proceedings, and in due course 
he signed a certificate to that effect.  
30. Kennedy LJ gave the lead judgment. He held that the knowledge of the first prosecutor 
“can be added to that of the charging officer” for the purposes of section 11(2) [at 
983B]. Kennedy LJ further held that, given that the first prosecutor had all the mate rial 
on which the prosecution was eventually brought, time began to run. His reasons were 
as follows [at 983D -F]: 
“[Counsel] contends that the words “sufficient in the opinion of 
the prosecutor to warrant the proceedings” are merely 
descriptive of the evidence, and that the prosecutor would not 
have to form his opinion for time to run. I accept that submission 
because  otherwise the prosecutor, in full possession of all 
relevant information, can prevent time running simply by not 
applying his mind to the case.  
Section 11(2) is an exception to the normal rule that summary 
offences should be prosecuted within six months. As an 
exception in favour of the prosecution, it should be strictly 
construed. The draftsman could have provided that proceedings 
for an offence under subsection (1) “may be brought within a 
period of six months from the date on which the prosecution 
forms the opinion that there is sufficient evidence to warrant 
proceedings” but he did not do so.”  
31. By “merely descriptive of the evidence”, Kennedy LJ meant that the evidence was 
sufficient to fulfil the full code test even if that judgment had not yet been made. 
Kennedy LJ was no doubt intending to distinguish this from situations where further 
inquiries were deemed necessary.  
32. In our judgment, Morgans  provides strong support for Mr Rule’s argument. It is not 
conclusively in his favour, because we must now address the question whether it is 
consistent with subsequent authority.  
33. The leading authority on provisions such as these is now the Chesterfield Poultry  case 
where Males LJ (sitting with Jefford J) undertook a careful and comprehensive review 
of relevant case law.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  DPP v Jinks  
 
 
Draft  23 December 2024  12:56  Page 8 34. One of the issues in the Chesterfield Poultry  case was the validity of the prosecutor’s 
certificate, being an issue which does not arise in the instant case. At para 35 of his 
judgment, Males LJ cited the core reasoning in Morgans , and then said this:  
“36. Thus the relevant date is the date on which the 
prosecutor has evidence which is sufficient in his opinion to 
warrant the proceedings, even if he or she has not yet formed 
that opinion . However, Morgans  says nothing about what 
matters need to be taken into account as being relevant to the 
question whether there is sufficient evidence to warrant the 
proceedings. In particular, there is nothing to suggest that the 
question whether a prosecution is in the i nterests of justice does 
not need to be considere d.” [emphasis supplied]  
35. We read the highlighted sentence as affirming Kennedy LJ’s approach in Morgans . The 
qualification appearing in the second sentence of para 36 relates to the validity of a 
conclusive certificate and not to what Males LJ was characterising as the “relevant date 
issue”: see para 37.  
36. Para 60 of Males LJ’s  judgment contains the germane legal test:  
“Second, the decision whether the evidence was sufficient to 
justify proceedings which Ms Sanghera had to make required an 
exercise of judgment on her part, both as to whether the evidence 
amounted to a prima facie case and whether proceedings were in 
the p ublic interest. However, the statutory question was when 
evidence which in her  opinion satisfied those criteria came to 
her knowledge, and not (if different) when she formed the 
opinion that proceedings were justified . The date on which the 
relevant eviden ce came to her knowledge is not, however, to be 
equated with the date on which the relevant evidence was placed 
on her desk or delivered to her inbox. Rather it is the date on 
or by which it has been considered so that knowledge of the 
content has been imparted.  In most cases, no doubt, and there 
is no reason to suppose that this case is different, the imparting 
of knowledge and the forming of opinion will happen together. 
The responsible individual will review the file and make a 
decision about prosecution . Hypothetically, however, if he or she 
were to review the file so as to have knowledge of all the relevant 
evidence, but only make a decision about prosecution at a later 
date, it seems to me that the date on which the file was reviewed 
would be the date when the evidence came to the prosecutor’s 
knowledge. To that limited extent, therefore, I respectfully 
disagree with Hickinbottom LJ’s statement in R v Woodward at 
para 23(iii) that the relevant date is the date on which the 
prosecutor decided that it in the public interest to prosecute.” 
(emphasis supplied)  
37. In DPP v Cook  [2022] EWHC 2963 (Admin); [2023] 4 WLR 77, this Court (Stuart 
Smith LJ and Fordham J) followed para 60 of the Chesterfield Poultry  case.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  DPP v Jinks  
 
 
Draft  23 December 2024  12:56  Page 9 38. Drawing these strands together, in our judgment Morgans , Chesterfield Poultry  and 
Cook  all support the related propositions that (1) the relevant date for the purposes of 
an extended limitation provision such as section 127(5)  is the date on which the material 
evidence (i.e. evidence which fulfils the full code test) is first considered by an 
authorised person so that knowledge of its content is imparted, and not the date when 
he formed the opinion that proceedings were justified, and (2) as soon as an auth orised 
person acquires the level of knowledge referred to in (1), time starts running regardless 
of the opinion that person actually forms. Put another way, the fact that the first 
prosecutor on the facts of the present case acted in a timely manner and formed the 
opinion that the evidence was not sufficient to justify proceedings is irrelevant to the 
prosecutor’s  date of knowledge. Unless and until a prosecutor decides to begin 
proceedings, section 127(5) can have no possible application; but as and when h e did – 
here, on 18 October 2021 – the relevant date was the date on which a prosecutor, here 
the first prosecutor, acquired knowledge of the content of the material evidence.  
39. Mr Boyd’s submission to the effect that the focus must be on the knowledge of the 
particular individual who goes on to decide that the material evidence is sufficient to 
warrant proceedings has little appeal. His submission is inconsistent  with Morgans , and 
– as Mr Rule pointed out – with basic principles of public law. The prosecution is 
brought by the CPS and not in the name of the individual prosecutor. Although 
knowledge of an individual prosecutor authorised to make the decision to prosecute is 
the sta tutory focus, her knowledge is imputed to the organisation on Carltona  
principles. There are also sound policy reasons for adopting this approach, not least 
because there is a public interest in summary -only proceedings, even those with an 
extended time limit, being brought and determined expeditiously, and the abuse of 
process jurisdiction may not alw ays be adequate to address the vices of paper -shuffling 
and intra -departmental delays. As was pointed out in oral argument, if there were  only 
one prosecutor and he or she either procrastinates or there is a change of mind, time 
would be running even on Mr  Boyd’s approach. There is no good reason, in our opinion, 
to distinguish this type of situation from th ose where there are more than one 
prosecutor.  
40. For the avoidance of doubt, we should make it clear that in cases where different 
evidence is placed before a second prosecutor because further inquiries have been 
undertaken, time would not run from the date of the first prosecutor’s acquisition of 
knowle dge.  
41. Once knowledge is acquired at the time of first consideration, it is incumbent on the 
CPS or the relevant prosecutorial body to proceed with reasonable expedition. That 
need for expedition must accommodate the possibility that a decision not to prosecute 
may find itself subject to review.  
42. For all these reasons, we conclude that the Judge’s decision was correct  in law, and that 
the relevant date for the purposes of the present case was  14 June 2021 and not  18 
October 2021. It follows that these proceedings were not brought in time.  
 
DISPOSAL

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down.  DPP v Jinks  
 
 
Draft  23 December 2024  12:56  Page 10 43. Turning to the two questions posed by the Judge, we answer these as follows. In our 
opinion , the Judge was correct  to hold that the relevant date was 14 June 2021 . 
Reformulating the Judge’s question slightly, the relevant date for the purposes of 
section 127(5) of the 2003 Act is the date on which a prosecutor first applied her mind 
to the material evidence in the case, being evidence which fulfilled both limbs of the 
full code test.  
44. This appeal must be dismissed.