Neutral Citation Number: [2023] EWHC 421 (Comm)  
Case No: CL -2018 -000648  
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE  
BUSINESS AND PROPERTY COURTS OF ENGLAND AND WALES  
COMMERCIAL COURT ( KBD) 
Date: 28/02/2023  
Before  : 
 
MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Between :  
 
 LONESTAR COMMUNICATIONS 
CORPORATION LLC   
Claimant  
 - and - 
(1) DANIEL KAYE  
(2) AVISHAI MARZIANO  
(3) CELLCOM TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
LIMITED  
(4) RAN POLANI  
(5) ORANGE LIBERIA, INC   
 
 
 
 
 
Defendants  
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Tony Singla KC, Sophie Shaw  and Mohammud Jaamae Ha feez-Baig  (instructed by 
Freshfield s Bruckhaus Deringer LLP ) for the Claimant  
Neil Kitchener KC and Andrew Lodder  (instructed by  Norton Rose Fulbright LLP ) for the 
Fifth Defendant   
 
Hearing dat es: 7, 08, 12, 13, 14, 15,  16, 19, 20 and 21 December 2022; 16 and 17 January 2023:  
Further written submissions received: 27 January 2023  
Draft Judgment Circulated: 17 February 2023  
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Approved Judgment  
 
I direct that no official shorthand note shall be taken of this Judgment and that copies 
of this version as handed down may be treated as authentic . 
.............................  
 
THE HONOURABL E MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
 
This judgment was handed down by the judge remotely by circulation to the parties’ 
representatives by email and release to The National Archives. The date and time for hand -
down is deemed to be Tuesday 28 February 2023  at 14:00.

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
2 
 The Honourable Mr Justice Foxton:   
A INTRODUCTION  
1. Between October 2015 and February 2017, the Claimant ( Lonestar ) – which provides 
cellular communication and internet services in Liberia – was the victim of a campaign of 
cyber -attacks (the DDOS Attacks ). Lonestar alleges that the DDOS Attacks were  
orchestrated by the First Defendant ( Mr Kaye ) with financial and tech nical support from 
the Second Defendant ( Mr Marziano ) and the F ourth  Defendant ( Mr Polani ).  
2. The key issues at trial are:  
i) whether Mr Kaye, Mr Marziano and/or Mr Polani (collectively the Individual 
Defendants ) are liable in tort to Lonestar for the DDOS A ttacks;  
ii) if and to the extent that they are, whether the  Third Defendant ( Cellcom BVI ) and/or 
the Fifth Defen dant ( Orange Liberia ) are vicariously or otherwise liable for the ir 
actions; and  
iii) what damages Lonestar is entitled to recover against anyone who is liable  (both 
compensatory and, if available and appropriate, exemplary).  
3. None of the Individual Defendants has participated in the trial at any stage. Cellcom BVI 
initially participate d, but withdr ew in early January 2022 , saying that this was the result of 
financial difficulties. That has left Lonestar and Orange Liberia as the active participants at 
the hearing, with the principal areas of debate between those parties being:  
i) whether, on th e basis of largely uncontested facts, the Individual Defendants and 
Orange Liberia are liable under the applicable principles of Liberian law;  
ii) if so, what loss Lonestar has suffered, and whether in addition to compensatory 
damages the court should also mak e an award of exemplary damages (and, if so, in 
what amount).  
B THE PARTIES  
4. Lonestar is a well-established telecommunications company operating in Liberia and forms 
part of the MTN Group , the largest mobile network operator in Africa . 
5. Orange Liberia is now  a company in the Orange Group. Until April 201 6, when it was 
acquired by the Orang e Group, it was owned by Cellcom BVI and known as Cellcom 
Liberia . 
6. Mr Kaye  provide d hacking for hire  services . In 2018, he was convicted by a Cologne court 
of offences invol ving cyber -attacks on Deutsche Telekom. H e has also been convicted of 
orchestrating the campaign of hacking against Lonestar , and on 11 January 2019 he was 
sentenced by HHJ Milne KC at Blac kfriars Crown Court to 32 months’ imprisonment  for 
that offence, fo llowing a guilty plea .

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
3 
 7. Mr Marziano was Chief Executive Offic er of Cellcom Liberia from 2009 to 2013 and again 
from 2014. He also became G roup Chief Executive Officer of Cellcom BVI in November 
2013. From April 2016 to January 2017, he continued in office a s the CEO of what was 
now Orange Liberia . His salary in respect of the latter role was paid by Cellcom BVI, who 
billed it back to Orange  Liber ia from April 2016 . 
8. Mr Ran Polani was  employed by Cellcom BVI  from October 2010 , and worked from April 
2016 to September 2017  as a mid -level manager  in Orange Liberia’s Internet Services 
Provider Business Unit . His salary was also paid by Cellcom BVI, who billed it back to 
Orange Liberia  from April 2016 . 
9. As I have stated, the Individual Defendants have not par ticipated in the trial at any stage.  
10. Cellcom BVI was represented by solicitors and counsel for much of the pre -trial phase of 
these proceedings, and served factual evidence and expert evidence on Liberian law. 
However, on 13 December 2021, Cellcom BV I’s so licitors informed the court that they 
would be applying to come off the record (which they did the following day), and that 
Cellcom  BVI would henceforth be represented by one of its directors.  
11. At the PTR, before me on 20 December 2021, provision was made for Cellcom BV I to 
apply to the court for permission for Mr Snider to represent it at the trial, and to serve 
evidence setting out the alleged financial difficulties which were said to have caused it to 
dispense with legal representation. However, on 7 Jan uary 2022, Cellcom BVI informed 
Lonestar  that it would not be pursuing that application, and that it would not be seeking to 
call factual or expert evidence at the trial. The reasons why Cellcom BVI followed this 
course, and whether it resulted from financ ial difficulties or other factors, are in dispute, 
and the court is not in a position to make any findings about them.  
C THE EVIDENCE  
C1 Fact Witnesses  
C1(1)  Lonestar  
12. Lonestar ’s only factual witness was Mr Karl Toriola, the CEO of MTN Nigeria 
Communications Ltd, the indirect majority shareholder in Lonestar. In April 2015, he was 
appointed as a Group Operations Executive, and in December 2015 he became MTN ’s Vice 
President for West and Central Africa, remaining in that role until December 2020. Between 
April 2015 and December 2020, Liberia was one of the markets over which Mr Toriola had 
oversight, and Lonestar’s CE O (Mr Babatunde Osho) reported to him.  
13. It was Mr Toriola’s evide nce that:  
“As part of that oversight, I received documents produced by Lonestar and reporting 
on Lonestar’s performance …. Outside of those structured reporting mechanisms … 
I was also in frequent communication with Lonestar’s CEO, very often on a weekly, 
if not daily, basis”.

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
4 
 14. There is no doubt that Mr Toriola is a highly capable and experienced senior 
telecommunications executive, with good tactical awareness and great fluency of 
expression. It may be those qualities which led Lonestar to conclude that he should be its 
only fact witness at trial . However:  
i) It became clear in the course of his cross -examination that Mr Toriola’s grasp of the 
basic chronology of the DDOS attacks on Lonestar was poor. His evidence was that 
the worst effects of the attacks were  experienced from  October 2015 to January 2016 
and March to April 2016, rather than just from mid -July 2016 onwards . While 
chronologically s upportive of Lonestar’s quantum calculation, this evidence is 
completely inconsistent with the contemporaneous document s (as explained below) . 
ii) I am satisfied that Mr Toriola’s evidence as to the quality, frequency and content of 
information communicated to  him about the DDOS Attacks “outside of … structured 
reporting mechanisms” was the subject of very considerable overstatement, as was 
his evidence as to how much of his time was taken up with DDOS -related matters , 
and how large the issue loomed at the time . Thus, he appears to have received only 3 
or fewer emails dealing with the DDOS Attacks between October 2015 and July 2016 . 
iii) I am satisfied that the unreliability of Mr Toriola’s evidence in these respects reflected 
(a) the limited nature of his engagement  with the DDOS Attacks contemporaneously, 
which is scarcely surprising given his senior position and responsibility for operations 
in a number of West and Central African countries  (Liberia accounting for only about 
3% of the markets within his sphere of r esponsibility) ; and (b) a readiness on his part 
to tailor his evidence so as to support Lonestar’s case.  
iv) In these circumstances, it is necessary to approach his evidence with caution. In 
particular, I am satisfied that the contemporaneous assessments withi n Lonestar 
provide a much more reliable basis for assessing the duration and effect of the DDOS 
Attacks, and their commercial consequences, than Mr Toriola’s evidence , and that his 
own evidence that the contemporary view of management  was that the DDOS Att acks 
were responsible for the greater part in the decline in Lonestar’s performance over 
the period from October 2015 to January 2017 was wrong.  
15. Lonestar’s decision to call Mr Toriola, rather than anyone working “in country” at the 
relevant time, meant that there was no witness before the court who was able to speak with 
the benefit of experience of working at Lonestar at the relevant time. No satisfactory 
explanation was offered for this evidential deficiency. In particular it is apparent that a 
number of the executives who held senior positions with Lonestar at the relevant time still 
work within the MTN group, includi ng Mr Andrew Bugembe (who was Chief Financial 
Officer from October 2014 to August 2016) and Mr Kyomukama (Chief Technology and 
Independent Officer from September 2014 to September 2016). The explanations offered 
in Appendix A to Lonestar’s closing for the absence of these witnesses were not persuasive , 
and rather served to highlight the importance of the missing evidence . It was said that Mr 
Bugembe‘s work was “primarily focussed on finance” and that Mr Kyomu kama’s evidence 
would not hav e added materially to Mr Toriola’s given that he was “a former Chief 
Technical Officer” ( which I understand to be  a reference to Mr Toriola’s r ole as D eputy 
Chief Technical Officer of Airtel Nigeria, working in Nigeria, up to 2006).

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
5 
 C1(2)  Orange Liberia  
16. Orange Liberia adduced factual evidence from four witnesses.  
i) Mr Mamadou  Coulibaly, who was the CEO of Orange Liberia between February 2017 
and October 2 020. 
ii) Mr Gregory Cardoza, the Chief Technical Officer of Orange Liberia since 2010.   
iii) Mr Diakalia Berte, who was the CFO of Orange Liberia between April 2016 and April 
2022 , and a senior manager at Orange C ote d’Ivoire ( Orange CDI ) between May 
2010 and 7 Apr il 2016.  
iv) Mr Kolo Kone, was Deputy Chief Technology Officer at Orange CDI between April 
2020 and November 2021 , and was Chief ITN and Network Integration Officer at 
Orange Liberia between April 2016 and April 2020.  
17. The evidence of these witnesses was of ver y limited assistance in the resolution of the 
factual disputes  which had to be determined at the trial . Only Mr Cardoza and, for part of 
the period,  Mr Berte and  Mr Kone were working for Cellcom/Orange Liberia during the 
relevant period. Their evidence as to their perceptions, from within Cellcom/Orange 
Liberia, of the significance of the  DDOS Attacks for Lonestar was inevitably that of 
“outsiders”. It was also coloured by the parties’ competing narratives in the dispute , as 
became clear during the course o f their cross -examination. For that reason, I do not feel 
able to place any reliance on their evidence as to the significance of the DDOS Attacks. In 
relation to all four witnesses, t heir evidence did not add materially to the contemporaneous 
documents , which provide the best , and most reliable,  evidence of the impact of the DDOS 
Attacks  on Lonestar . 
C2 Expert evidence  
18. The court heard expert evidence in three disciplines.  
C2(1)  The Liberian Law Experts  
19. First, expert evidence in Liberian law:  
i) for Lonestar, from Counsellor Gloria Musu -Scott, formerly Chief Justice of the 
Liberian Supreme Court from 1997 to 2003, when she returned to private practice ; 
and 
ii) for Orange Liberia, from Counsellor  Gerald Padmore , a US trained and based l awyer 
who has been admitted to the Liberian bar for more than 50 years, and a substantial 
part of whose practice involves adv ising on matters of Liberian law.  
In addition, expert report s from Professor Phillip Banks  III, obtained by Cellcom BVI, w ere 
placed by Orange Liberia before the court under CPR 3 5.11, but Professor Banks did not 
give evidence.  Professor Banks is a professor at the Louis A Grimes School of Law in 
Liberia, and was an Associate Justice of the Liberian Supreme Court from 2011 to 20 18.

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
6 
 20. Counsellor Musu -Scott is clearly able to speak authoritatively as to the likely outlook of the 
Liberian Supreme Court on broad issues of judicial policy. However, her evidence was less 
informative when seeking to address the issues of Liberian law at a more granular level, 
and she had a tendency to answer questions by referring Mr Kitchener KC to what she had 
said in h er report (much as a  judge might refer counsel to what they had said in a judgment, 
without wishing to enlarge on or debate  its contents ). While Lonestar w as undoubtedly 
correct to observe in its closing submissions that “her evidence in cross -examination was 
consistent with her reports”, it was also co -extensive with it as well. The “conclusory” 
character of her evidence made it less help ful than it would otherwise have been, given the 
highly debateable nature of many of the issues of Liberian law.  
21. Counsellor Padmore was an impressive witness, who was willing to engage in debate and 
to give ground , and whose answers were reflective. W hile he has practised from the U.S. 
for the last 40 years, I am satisfied that he is an expert in and knowledgeable of Liberian 
law, with considerable experience of litigation in the Liberian courts. He was willing in the 
course of his oral evidence to acknowle dge a degree of “rough and readiness” in aspects of 
the decision -making of the Liberian court (something which, understandably, would have 
been difficult for Counsellor Musu -Scott). However, when tested against those realities, the 
analysis of certain issu es in his reports did appear to present  a rather idealised version of 
Liberia n law. 
C2(2)  The Cyber-secur ity Experts  
22. Second, the court heard expert evidence in cyber security : 
i) for Lonestar, from Mr Alex Campbell, a Director in the London office of Stroz 
Friedberg, where he is responsible for significant digital forensics and incident 
response investigations ; and  
ii) for Orange Liberia, from Mr Steven Shepherd  MBE , a cyber -security consultant at 
PA Consulting.  
23. On the purely technical questions, the evidence of b oth witnesses was informed, helpful 
and only in dispute to a limited extent . As to their evidence in cross -examination : 
i) Mr Campbell had been asked to perform a forensic exercise in which he review ed 
contemporaneous emails, and offer ed a view as to whether they provided evidence of 
a DDOS Attack having taken place or impacted Lonestar on a particular  day or during 
a particular period . It became apparent during Mr Lodder’s impressive cross -
examination that t he approach Mr Campbell adopted when performing that exercise  
had been an  overinclusive one. I am satisfied that reading the documents in the 
context of the evidence overall provides the best means of gauging the timing, 
duration and consequences of the DDOS Attacks, and I have reviewed the documents 
myself rather than simply accept Mr Campbell’s interpretation of them.  
ii) Mr Shepherd had an occasional tendency to anticipate the question asked and answer 
accordingl y. In addition, he was clearly troubled by Lonestar’s failure to preserve the 
technical data which he regarded as the best evidence on the issues he had been asked 
to address  (a concern which was justified, as I explain below) , and he had some

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
7 
 difficulty in moving past that point in the course o f his cross -examination. However, 
his evidence was clear and helpful, and he was willing to acknowledge  the evidential 
limitations in his analysis.  His explanation of the significance of the summary reports 
available from the mitigation systems, and what t hey did and did not show, was 
particularly helpful.  
C2(3)  Expert Evidence in Valuation and Economic Matters  
24. Third, expert evidence in valuation/economic  matters : 
i) for Lonestar, from Mr James Nicholson, a Chartered Financial Analyst and  Head of 
FTI Consultin g’s Economic and Financial Consulting practice in Asia ; and  
ii) for Orange Liberia, from Mr David Thomas, the managing partner of DT Economics 
LLP, a London based economics consultancy which focuses on the telecoms sector.  
25. Both experts were very well -qualified , well -prepared and adept at holding their ground in 
the course of cross -examination. On the key issues in dispute, they had adopted very 
different approaches, which, I suspect, were to a large extent conditioned by the forensic 
circumstances of the partie s calling them. As I explain below, the contemporaneous 
documents are not supportive of the scale and timing of loss for which Lonestar claims, and 
Mr Nicholson’s analysis was largely built on Mr Toriola’s evidence and a macro -economic 
analysis of the West  African mobile telecommunications market. Mr Thomas’ analysis was 
largely grounded in the i nternal materials disclosed by Lonestar. There were occasions in 
his cross -examination in which Mr Thomas became a little combative , and unnecessarily 
acerbic . Howe ver, I am satisfied that this was not the result of any misplaced loyalty to the 
party calling him, but r eflected  the strength of his belief in the reliability and intellectual 
robustness of his own analysis, and the unfavourable  view he had formed of Lonestar’s 
offering.  Nor is it fair to suggest (as Lonestar did in closing) that “Mr Thomas took an 
extreme view, making every conceivable point against Lonestar (however immaterial) with 
a view to justifying his extreme assumptions”. As I explain below, o n certain points Mr 
Thomas was willing to adopt what I suspect were assumptions which were favourable to 
Lonestar, in order to present a conservative and robust analysis. While Orange Liberia 
sought to row back from certain of those positions in closing, I  have not allowed them to 
do so. However, the fact of the attempt belies Lonestar’s characterisation of Mr Thomas’ 
evidence in closing.  
D THE FACTS  
D1 The Liberian Mobile Market  up to October 2015  
26. Liberia has a population of just over 5 million people, and a GDP per capita of $633. The 
vast majority of mobile communications business in Liberia is pre -paid voice business , by 
customers who top -up their SIM s on a very regular basis . 
27. Lonestar was the fi rst company to enter the Liberian cellular telecommunications market, 
in 1999  (the national carrier, Libtelco, only offered fixed wireless services and not cellular 
telecommunication services). For a period , Lonestar  was the only operator in that market , 
and hence the incumbent . It was  able to charge high prices both for SIM cards and to stay

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
8 
 connected.  
28. In 2005, Cellcom Liberia entered the market, and from that  point , the telecommunications 
market in Liberia has effectively been a two -player market.  In Marc h 2014, an Information 
Memorandum produced by Standard Bank in relation to the potential sale of Cellcom BVI 
estimated that the combined share of the Liberian telecommunications market of Lonestar 
and Cellcom Liberia  was 96%.  
29. In June 2012, Cellcom Liberia launched 3G ser vices, enabling it to be the first mobile 
operator to offer mobile data in Liberia, Lonestar’s offering being launched in December  
2013.  
30. Cellcom Liberia undertook a numbe r of marketing campaigns. These included its “$1 for 3 
days” campaign launched in March 2013, which offered three days of calls to other numbers 
on the Cellcom Liberia network for US$1.  
31. It is clear that this offer , which remained in operation until Septem ber 2019,  had a 
significant impact on the Liberian market . Having made a profit of $28.2m in 2013, 
Lonestar’s profit fell to $7.4m in 2014 and US$1.96m in 2015 (a year in which Mr 
Nicholson, Lonestar’s expert, suggests that there was only a US$0.1m impact from the 
DDOS Attacks).  The figures for (combined voice/data) market share show Lonestar’s 
progressive loss of market  share to Cellcom Liberia : 
 
32. There was also a steady decline in Lonestar’s Average Revenue per User ( ARPU ) – once 
again the figures present ed below are combined voice/data figures :

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
9 
  
33. In April 2015, Lonestar was forced to introduce its own $1 for 3 days package , albeit one 
not available to High Value Customers ( HVCs ), known as DYO . Between April and 
October 2015, the combined (voice/data) ARPU s of Lonestar and Cellcom Liberia were 
running roughly in parallel, although there is a dispute between the parties as to whether 
Lonestar had steadied the ship, as it contends, or whether this was a brief pause in its 
irresistible downwards descent.  
34. The m obile market in Liberia was, at the relevant time, dominated by voice rather than data:  
i) In October 2015, at the start of the DDOS Attack period, over 90% of Lonestar’s 
revenue was from voice traffic, and at the end of the DDOS Attack period, voice 
accounte d for over 85% of Lonestar ’s revenue.  It was common ground that Lonestar 
was still the voice incumbent in October 2015.  
ii) Data was mo re important to Cellcom Liberia, but still only amount ed to 32% of 
revenue by October 2015.  Cellcom Liberia was undoubtedly t he data incumbent, 
enjoying 5 times the data usage and double the ARPU on data of Lonestar.  
iii) There is nothing particularly surprising in the mobile voice and data markets having 
different incumbent operators, and it is a state of affairs which is even less surprising 
in the Liberian market than it might be elsewhere. By 2013/2014, it had become very 
common for mobile phone users in Liberia to have both a Lonestar and a Cellcom 
Liberia SIM, allowing them to use both networks depend ing on strength of coverage 
as relevant to the particular call they wanted to make, and the particular network of 
the person they wanted to call (assuming that they were not also “multi -SIMing”) 
because “on network” calls were cheaper than using one network to call a phone on

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
10 
 another  network. The speed with which Liberia became a “multi -SIM market” can be 
seen from the fact that by the middle of 2018, a Lonestar budget was referring to “near 
100% multi -SIM usage”.  
iv) One consequence of the “multi -SIMing” was that mobile users who used bo th voice 
and data could have a preferred network for voice (Lonestar) and a preferred network 
for data (Cellcom Liberia).  
35. A particular issue of controversy so far as the relative positions of Lonestar and Cellcom 
Liberia is concerned is who had a higher pr oportion of HVCs – those who spent appreciably 
more than the average user -spend. A key element in Lonestar’s quantum case is that 
Cellcom Liberia’s aggressive pricing had not won them many HVCs, who were more 
interested in quality of service and network co verage than price, and for that reason were 
attracted to Lonestar. Lonestar contends that it was the adverse effects of the DDOS Attacks 
on the quality of its service which led HVCs to move to Cellcom / Orange Liberia. As to 
this: 
i) A Lonestar Market Perform ance Report of April 2014 suggests that Cellcom Liberia’s  
proportionate share of HVCs (36% -63%) was broadly equivalent to its proportionate 
share of the market as a whole (34% -64%).  
ii) Lonestar’s Market Performance Report for the third quarter of 2015 suggested that in 
the intervening 18 months, the relative split of HVCs was 46%:51%, and that HVCs 
viewed the Cellcom Liberia network more favourably (reflected in a higher “NPS” or 
“Network Promoter Score”, with Cellcom Liberia leading Lonestar by 32% on this 
measure by October 2015).  HVCs compared Lonestar’s value offering particularly 
unfavourably with Cellcom Liberia’s.  Whether, as Lonestar asserts, it was still ahead 
overall so far as HVCs are concerned by the end of the third quarter of September 
2015  depends on the accuracy of its own data , which there are reasons to doubt. Mr 
Nicholson accepted that by October 2015, Cellcom Liberia probably had a higher 
proportion of HVCs and a higher absolute number. Whether that is correct or not, the 
direction of travel so far as HVCs are concerned is clear, and it was towards Cellcom 
Liberia , who must have been close to, if not at or above, parity by the start of the 
DDOS Attacks.  
iii) The contemporary documents do not support the (somewhat counter -intuitive) 
assertion that HVCs were not significantly motivated by price.  As explained below, 
in January 2016, Lonestar took the very significant decision to open up its DYO 
offering to HVCs: something only explicable on the b asis that HVCs were motivated 
by price. A Lonestar proposal produced in March 2016 aimed at winning back HVCs 
referred to a fall in HVC revenues of 63% since December 2012 which was the direct 
result of Cellcom  Liberia ’s “$1 – 3 days” offering introduced i n March 2013.  
iv) Finally, it is essential to keep the voice/data distinction firmly in mind  – not only did 
Cellcom Liberia  launch 3G 18 months before Lonestar, but it  had more cell sites, 
better download speeds and better internet gateway capacity . If HVCs ha d been 
motivated by quality of service rather than price to the extent that Lonestar claim s, 
then its data business would naturally have migrated to Cellcom Liberia, which had

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
11 
 a stronger offering  and first mover advantage . 
D2 The Cellcom -Orange Transaction  
36. In July 2015,  Orange CDI  submitted  a binding offer to Cellcom BVI to acquire 85-90% of 
the share capital of Cellcom Liberia . A stock purchase agreement for the sale was  signed 
on 18 December 2015, and amended on 5 April 2016  (the S PA).  
37. Under the final version of the S PA: 
i) Orange CDI paid an “Initial Price” of $105m  (clause 2.5), subject to certain 
contractually agreed adjustment s to take account of debt, working capital and capital 
expenditure before the sale. Of that amount, $9m was to be paid int o escrow, and 
released to Cellcom BVI in three equal tranches o n the first, second and third 
anniversaries of the sale (clause 2.6(a)).  
ii) Clause 2.5(d) provided that the Initial Price was to be increased by $5m if the 
“Normalized EBITDA” figure derived from Cellcom Liberia’s audited accounts for 
2015 was greater than US$23,500,000.  
iii) Clause 2.8 provided for the payment of an “earn -out” payment calculated by reference 
to the “Normalized EBITDA” figure derived from Cellcom BVI’s audited accounts 
for the 12-month period ending on 30 June 2016.  
I will refer to the payments in (ii) and (iii) as the Earn Out Payments . 
38. On 5 April 2016, Cellcom BVI, Cellcom Liberia and another Orange entity ( Orange BVI ) 
entered into a Transitional Services Agreement ( the TSA ) by which C ellcom BVI agreed 
to provide certain services to Orange Liberia during a period after the completion of the 
sale, in return for the payment of fees. These included “consulting services” to be provided 
by various named members of staff, including Mr Marzian o and Mr Polani. In total, 
Cellcom BVI was paid $1,568,038 under the TSA.  
D3 The DDOS Attacks : An Introduction  
D3(1)  The Types of DDOS Attack  and the Means of Mitigating T hem 
39. A DDOS attack is a form of cyber -attac k in which the perpetrator seeks to make a machine 
or network resource unavailable to its intended users by flooding the target machine or 
resource from multiple different sources, in an effort to overwhelm it and prevent legitimate 
requests for connection being fulfilled.  
40. The DDOS Attacks were attacks on Lonestar’s data work, and did not have a technical 
impact on the availability or quality of Lonestar’s voice network.  
41. There are, broadly, three types of DDOS attack, all of which featured in the attacks on 
Lonestar : 
i) “Volumetric” attacks which seek to consume some or all of the bandwidth of the

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
12 
 victim’s network, and thereby block the access of legitimate users to the system.   
ii) “State exhaustion” attacks which seek to consume or overwhelm specific parts of the 
network by getting services or infrastructure to respond to false requests for 
connections.  
iii) “Application layer ” attacks which target a specific part of an application or service 
such as a specific webpage, and seek to exhaust the application or service.  
42. It is common for these types of attack to be used in combination , in what is known as a 
“multi -vector attack”. They can be carried out by using so -called “Booters”, which are 
publicly available, on -demand, we b-based “DDOS -for-hire” services offered for a f ee by 
cybercriminals, who undertake external attacks on a network. They can also be undertaken 
using “Botnets”, which involves infecting a victim’s software with malware controlled by 
cybercriminals, such that it can then be used (along with other infected  devices) to carry 
out a DDOS attack . 
43. Lonestar was the victim of multi -vectored DDOS attack s, involving all three types of 
DDOS attacks, using both “Booters” (in particular the “vDOS” booter service) and Botnets 
(Lonestar’s system being attacked by devices  infected by the “Mirai” or “Mirai#14” 
malware ). 
44. Lonestar had in place measures designed to protect it against the effects of DDOS attacks , 
and those systems were enhanced during the period of the DDOS Attacks:  
i) When the attacks began, Lonestar had installe d the Huawei Abnormal Traffic 
Inspection System  (the Huawei System ) and the Arbor Atlas System.  
ii) The Huawei System is an on/off -premises system which identifies DDOS traffic on -
premises, directs it off -premises to Huawei’s servers to be cleaned (or scrubbed) and 
then returns it to the client’s network.  In October 2015, it had a capacity of 20 
gigabits. In March 2016, the capacity of that system was increased to 120 gigabits.  
iii) The Arbor Atlas system is a DDOS intelligence system, not a mitigation syste m. 
However, from 22 July 2016, Lonestar was using the Arbor Peakflow System, an on -
premises system which identified and cleaned DDOS traffic.  This added an extra 60 
gigabits of cleaning capacity.   
iv) From 7 September 2016, Lonestar was using the Arbor C loud s ystem, an off -premises 
system which identified and cleaned DDOS traffic.  
v) The Huawei and Peakflow systems were set up to deal with state exhaustion and 
application layer attacks, and the Arbour Cloud system with volumetric attacks.  
D3(2) Sources of Evidence  as to the Timing, Scale and Impact  of the DDOS Attacks  
45. It is common ground that Lonestar has had in its possession technical data which would 
substantially have identified the number, type and duration of the DDOS Attacks. In 
particular, Lonestar would ha ve had data showing what network devices and services were

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
13 
 affected by DDOS traffic, in what ways, and for how long. However, Lonestar did not retain 
that data. While I am satisfied that Lonestar’s failure to preserve this technical data was not 
the result  of any deliberat e decision to ensure that it was not available in the litigation, it s 
failure to preserve this material is  surprising. Lonestar knew it had been subjected to the 
DDOS Attacks from October 2015, on its own case they were having a very signi ficant 
impact on its business and profitability, and it made an insurance notification on 2 
November 2015.  Mr Kaye’s activities came to light in early 2017. While there had been 
some suggestion that it would have been very onerous to retain the material be cause of its 
size, Mr Campbell accepted in cross -examination that the traffic -flow and log files could 
have been stored  without retaining the underlying packets of information, and that this 
material could have been retained . I found Mr Campbell’s attempts  to explain away the 
failure to retain this data unconvincing.  
46. In terms of the material which is available:  
i) The Huawei and Arbor mitigation systems generated summary reports of traffic 
information which identified what DDOS or other anomalous traffic ha d been 
identified and what mitigation steps ha d been taken  (the Mitigation Reports ). 
ii) In addition, there is non -technical evidence in the form of contemporaneous emails 
and reports from which conclusions may be drawn as to the occurrence, or the effects, 
of a DDOS attack on particular date, albeit there is much greater scope for dispute as 
to what that documentation shows than would be the case with technical  data.  
47. Taking the Mitigation Reports first:  
i) The Mitigation Reports only record traffic which transits through those systems, and 
would not pick -up DDOS traffic which was able to bypass t hose systems. Further, a 
full set of Mitigation Reports is not available, and some of them are incomplete. 
Further the summary reports, which are all that are available, do not provide 
additional traffic metrics which would have been available on the under lying systems.  
ii) It was Mr Shepherd ’s evidence, which I accept, that the complete Mitigation Reports 
which were available showed DDOS attacks detected by the system (of all three 
kinds) on 351 days during the DDOS Attack period . In relation to those attacks,  it 
was only possible with the technical data available to measure the effect of the 
volumetric attacks. The complete Mitigation Reports showed that, on 132 days, the 
volume of the attacks exceeded the bandwidth capacity of Lonestar’s network  (which 
is a m easure only of the effect of volumetric attack), and on 18 of those days, the 
cleaning capacity of the system  (for which purpose Mr Shepherd adopted a more 
conservative figure than Mr Campbell as to what the cleaning capacity was in March 
2016) . 
iii) Mr Shepher d’s evidence, which  once again  I accept, is that the effect of the volume 
of traffic exceeding the processing capacity of Lonestar’s system would be some 
element of “latency” (or a slowing -down of the user experience), but that the degree 
of latency would vary depending on the extent of any excess. That latency could be a 
matter of milliseconds, which a user would not notice, to something more substantial .

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
14 
 It was not possible for Mr Shepherd to assess the degree of latency on the available 
technical informa tion, because he  require d network traffic metrics to do so, nor could 
he assess how quickly the network would have recovered from the DDOS Attacks.  
However, Mr Shepherd’s view was that:  
“For any attack within the scrubbing capacity of the mitigation system s, any 
latency resulting from the DDOS attacks would be measured in milliseconds 
and would not be noticeable to the user. It is only on days where the cleaning 
capacity of the mitigation system in question was significantly exceeded that a 
DDOS attack that  has been detected and mitigated would cause noticeable 
latency”.  
That statement was agreed by Mr Campbell in the experts’ joint statement, subject to 
the point addressed in the next sub -paragraph. As I have noted, there were 18 days 
when the volume of tra ffic exceeded the cleaning capacity of the mitigation systems.  
iv) Mr Shepherd’s figures did not include attacks which were kept off Lonestar’s system 
because they were diverted to the A rbor Cloud. He accepted that it would be possible 
to have DDOS attacks whi ch were so significant that they could affect public internet 
links, without actually entering the Lonestar network. However, I accept his evidence 
that it was not possible on the technical data now available to determine whether this 
happened, because it is not possible to determine how much data transited the two 
links in question. Mr Campbell did not suggest that there had been an impact on the 
public internet in his evidence.  
v) Mr Shepherd accepted that his “volumetric” analysis would not pick up the effects of 
DDOS Attacks of the other two kinds which the filtering of the mitigation systems 
was not set up to or capable of detecting (and attacks of those kinds can be more 
difficu lt to detect) , or wh ich bypassed the mitigation systems  (e.g. because they were 
entering Lonestar’s network through sites such as Facebook and Google, in 
circumstances in which the system had not been set up to route traffic from those 
sources through the mitigation software for part of the DDOS Attack period) . 
However, it was not possible from the technical data now available to determine 
whether there were state exhaustion or application layer attacks  which bypassed or 
got through the mitigation systems, or what if any effect they had.  
vi) Mr Singla KC placed much emphasis on a report produced by an organisation called 
USENIX for a security symposium in August 2017 which had analysed 1,000 
malware samples resulting from DDO S attacks aimed at a number of organisations 
using the Mira i malware, and concluded that they comprised 32% volumetric attacks, 
39% state exhaustion attacks and 34.5% application layer attacks. This data, however, 
only relates to the period from 31 October  2016 onwards ( Mr Kaye having first used 
the Mi rai botnet on that date ), nor does it answer the question of how many of these 
attacks would have evaded or partially transited the mitigation systems.  
48. It will be apparent from this summary that:  
i) Mr Shepherd’s  analysis of the available technical data alone may not identify all the

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
15 
 effects of the DDOS Attacks. Had Lonestar retained and disclosed the mitigation 
system log reports, it would have been possible to determine the effects of state 
exhaustion and applic ation layer attacks which were not detected by the mitigation 
software or bypassed the mitigation systems altogether (if there were any).  
ii) It is n ot possible from the available technical data alone to determine the effect on 
user experienc e, save that I am satisfied that, on volumetric effects, latency will only 
have been noticeable when the volume of traffic exceeded the cleaning capacity, 
which was 18 days (or a lower figure if the figures used by Mr Campbell for th at 
capacity are correct).  
49. Turning to the contemporaneous documents : 
i) Mr Campbell has identified 125 days on which he says that there is documentary 
evidence of the adverse effects of a DDOS attack. 57 of those days overlap with the 
132 days on which Mr Shepherd accepts that there is evidence of a DDOS attack 
(although, as noted above, Mr Shepherd says that there would only have been adverse 
effects noticed by users on a maximum of 18 days).  
ii) Mr Singla KC sought to suggest that it followed from the limited nature of this overlap 
that there must have been DDOS attacks which were not picked up by the mitigation 
systems, or which had adverse effects on users otherwise than through volumetric 
effects.  
iii) There are a number of  reasons why this might not be the case : (i) that Mr Campbell 
has misinterpreted th e relevant document; (ii) that the sender of the relevant document 
has misunderstood or misdiagnosed what they are observing; or (iii) that there are 
undetected attacks, or attacks with non -volumetric effects. The answer, in all 
probability, is that all  of these events have occurred, with Mr Lodder’s cross -
examination of Mr Campbell identifying a number of examples of (i) and (ii) and Mr 
Singla KC’s cross -examination of Mr Shepherd identifying some possible examples 
of (iii).  
iv) This range of possibilities ref lects the fact that,  while a useful source of evidence, 
contemporaneous documents of this kind are inherently less informative on the 
question of the existence and effect of DDOS Attacks than technical data . Nor do 
statements in individual emails assist in  assessing the duration or severity of any 
effect.  
v) In my view, the assessment of th e documentary  evidence is best undertaken in the 
context of the evidence as a whole, rather than simply seeking to add up the number 
of days which can be linked to a relevan t document, and then presenting the resultant 
total as significant in itself (as Mr Campbell did).  
D4 A Detailed Chronological Analysis  
D4(1)  August -September 2015  
50. A document prepared by Mr Ma rziano commenting on Lonestar’s Particulars of Claim

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
16 
 acknowledges that he knew Mr Kaye  before the DDOS Attacks began , and claims that he 
first met Mr Kaye  “sometime in 2015”. By August 2015, Mr Marziano and Mr Kaye were 
communicating about a proposed cyber -attack on Lonestar through an encrypted instant -
messaging application called “Threema”. It is clear from their exchanges that the topic had 
been discussed before  the first available communication , and that it was proposed that Mr 
Marziano pay Mr Kaye to ca rry out the attacks. Agreement was reached on the broad 
purpose of the attacks, including disrupting, damaging and sabotaging Lonestar’s business.  
51. Mr Marziano provided Mr Kaye with Lonestar email addresses to assist him. Mr Kaye 
began constructing a “bot”  to assist in the attacks. On 12 September 2015, Mr Kaye and Mr 
Marziano met in Nice, and Mr Marziano  paid Mr Kaye $9,000 in cash.  
D4(2)  October -December 2015  
52. On 12 October 2015, Mr Kaye provided a brief demonstration of DDOS attacks  on 
Lonestar , and Mr Ma rziano identified certain times when he wanted Mr Kaye to take down 
Lonestar’s internet services.  On 15 and 16 October, Mr Marziano reported back on the 
effect of the DDOS Attacks to date, and steps Lonestar w as reportedly taking to deal with 
them. On 22 O ctober, they discussed ways in which the DDOS Attacks might be made 
more powerful.  
53. In early November, Mr Marziano provided Mr Kaye with Threema contact details for Mr 
Polani. Mr Polani then communicated with Mr Kaye directly, providing him with relevant 
information, and discussing how further DDOS Attacks could be undertaken, and how Mr 
Polani might help. Mr Polani also reported back on the effects of the DDOS Attacks as 
perceived in Liberia. Mr Marziano made a further payment to Mr Kaye on 5 November 
2015,  and they met in London on 14 November 2015.   
54. Turning to the effect of the DDOS Attacks, t here are 10 days in October in which traffic 
identified by the Huawei mitigation system exceeded the capacity of Lonestar’s network 
and cleaning system:  
i) 3-4 October ; 
ii) 13-16 October ; 
iii) 24-27 October.  
55. On all of those dates save for 27 October, Mr Campbell has identified documents referring 
to effects consistent with DDOS attacks.  Mr Campbell  identifies documents which he says 
evidence effective DDOS attacks on 7-9, 12, 17, 19 -23 and 28 -30 October.  
56. It is clear from the contemporaneous documents that there was an attack lasting just over 
an hour on 3 October, and a shorter attack the following day , 4 October . I acce pt that the 
first of these would have caused noticeable latency for a period, and perhaps the second, 
but Mr Marziano’s Threema chat in the evening of 4 October makes it clear that all effects 
had ceased by that point. Mr Kaye was on holiday over the perio d from 7 -9 October, and I 
am not persuaded that there were any attacks during that period. I accept that there were 
two brief attacks on 12 October, when Mr Kaye sought to demonstrate to Mr Marziano

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
17 
 during a Threema chat that he could switch the attacks “o n” and “off”.  
57. There were further attacks between 13 -16, and 24 -27 October. The significance and scale 
of the October attacks is, in my view, best captured in the following documents:  
i) A report prepared by Huawei on 13 October 2015 referring to two attacks o n 3 and 4 
October, but no other attacks up to that point.  
ii) A report prepared by Mr Bowier on 30 October 2015 referring to the problems 
beginning on 13 -17 October, and further problems from 24 -27 October, which were 
resolved. The report suggested that the is sues had been addressed and resolved, with 
normal traffic now being observed. Other internal reports suggest that traffic was 
back -to-normal by the end of the month.  
iii) The data traffic flow graphs in the 30 October report, which show 13 -16 and 24 -27 
October as the period of abnormally high traffic.  
58. Lonestar’s October 2015 review referred to the DDOS Attacks as a “key challenge”, with 
internal and external actions having improved matters in the last couple of days of the 
month. The review did not ident ify any adverse effects  from the DDOS Attacks, and Mr 
Toriola did not suggest that there had been any.  
59. The Mitigation Reports do not show any occasions when there were attacks exceeding the 
scrubbing capacity of Lonestar’s network in either November or Dec ember 2015. Mr 
Campbell has referred to two documents said to show effects on the system on three days 
in that period – 3 November, 29 November and 1 December. However, I am not persuaded 
that there were any appreciable effects of DDOS Attacks on Lonestar i n those months:  
i) Mr Kaye ’s messages to Mr Marziano on Threema on 10, 11, 15, 20 and 29 November 
2015 were all to the effect that he was trying but not succeeding  to attack Lonestar . 
Their exchanges in December do not suggest that there was an attack.  
ii) The 3 November email refers to a brief attack during a period of planned emergency 
maintenance which reduced the efficacy of the mitigation software for about an hour.  
iii) An email referring to slowness on a particular VLAN on 29 November and 1 
December was investig ated by Huawei, who concluded that there was no evidence of 
a DDOS attack.  
iv) There was no official report of any attacks in those months (in the Ops Reviews or 
otherwise) and the Q4 2015 CEO Report stated that “the attacks are now contained 
after enhancement  of the anti -DDOS policies both internally and at MTN.NET”.  
v) No written report of a DDOS attack was made to Mr Toriola between 16 October 
2015 and 7 February 2016, and I am unable to accept his evidence that he was 
receiving verbal reports of attacks during  this period. As would be expected, Lonestar 
and MTN operated with thorough management information systems which provided 
comprehensive reports of the business. Had the DDOS Attacks impacted Lonestar in 
November and December 2015, this would have found its  way into the management

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
18 
 reporting documentation.  
60. It is important to consider Lonestar’s financial performance in Q4 2015, in view of the 
suggestion that it was the effects of the DDOS attacks which drove a key pricing decision 
in January 2016:  
i) Its perform ance against budget in terms of data usage improved in November and 
December 2015 as against September 201 5 (rising from 68% ahead of budget YTD 
to 83% ahead of budge t YTD).  
ii) It achieved 110% of budget for data users as at 31 December 2015.  
iii) Notwithstanding the higher usage, revenue and EBITDA were below expectations. 
This was attributed by Lonestar’s management to the ongoing price war with Cellcom 
Liberia, and there was no attempt to link that unwelcome performance with the DDOS 
Attacks . 
iv) The differential in  the average combined ARPU between Lonestar and Cellcom 
Liberia at the end of Q4 2015 was $1.01, as it had been at the end of Q2 and Q3, 
before the DDOS Attacks began.  
61. There is nothing, therefore, to suggest that the DDOS Attacks had had any significant 
impact on Lonestar’s data business by the end of 2015, still  less that any impact on 
Lonestar’s data business had begun to have a knock -on impact on Lonestar’s voice 
business.  
D4(3) January to June 2016  
62. There is no real visibility as to any interactions betw een Mr Kaye and Mr Marziano over 
this period. There were no occasions i n January 2016 when DDOS Atta cks occurred at 
levels which exceeded Lonestar’s network or scrubbing capacities. While Mr Campbell 
suggests that there are documents which are consistent w ith the effects of DDOS Attacks 
on 6 and 29 January, neither document will bear the weight placed on it:  
i) The 6 January document is concerned with difficulty accessing websites at a 
particular email address, which does not appear to have received “dirty” tr affic on 6 
January, and other websites could be accessed.  
ii) The 29 January email is a complaint about Orange blocking access to certain ports 
on a recently activated  internet link, and no DDOS attack traffic was detected on that 
day. 
63. Consistent with that picture : 
i) The Ops Review for January 2016 makes no reference to any DDOS attacks in 
January 2016, nor does any other management  document.   
ii) The Q1 CEO Report referred only to improvements to the mitigation capacity “in the 
wake of the DDOS attacks endured last year ” (emphasis added).

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
19 
 iii) The Ops Review for January 2016, which had to deliver the very bad news that 
revenues were 10% below budget YTD , 21% lower than in January 2015, and data 
revenues were 46% below budget, did not seek to ascribe this to the DDOS Attacks, 
or refer to any attacks that month.  
64. In January 2016, Lonestar decided to open up its DYO offer ing to HVCs – a hugely 
significant pr icing decision which would inevitably have an adverse impact on its ARPU. 
There is no suggestion in any of the contemporaneous document s that this decision was a 
response to the DDOS Attacks. On the contrary, the available documentation attributes the 
decision (entirely understandably) to the need to compete with Cellcom Liber ia’s $1-3 days 
offer:  
i) In the Q1 2016 CEO Report, Mr Osho referred to an “HVC ARPU decline as blacklist 
is lifted and HVCs down grade to DYO ($1 for 3 )”, and stated  that Lonestar was 
continuing to drive DYO “to be competitive”. It noted that MOU had declined by 5% 
against the previous quarter, reflecting the fact that Q4 of the year is traditionally a 
high use period, and the effect of “new bundles and price plans with capped mins” 
(i.e., Lonestar customers using its DYO offer had the ir number of minutes of use 
capped in January 2016 , which exerted a downwards pressure on MOU ). 
ii) In the March 2016 “HVC Win Back Plan”, the drop in revenue from HVCs was 
attributed to “competition $1 for 3 days  promotion” , and was described as having 
been ongoing for 39 months . This document contained a thorough review of the 
reasons why Lonestar was losing HVCs (both by way of reduced earnings and churn 
of 16% of the customer base). T he DDOS Attacks were not ev en mentioned.  
65. As I have said, a s part of the process of opening up DYO to HVCs, Lonestar made changes 
to DYO which made it less attractive than Cellco m/Orange Liberia’s $1 -3 days offering: 
capping the number of minutes  for each user, capping the total amou nt of voice traffic on 
the network for 6 hours a day and placing  limits on the number of times a customer could 
re-charge the $1 -3 days each month. Certainly, Lonestar disclosed some documents which 
suggest that it took  these steps, which Mr Thomas interpr eted in this sense, and no witness 
was called by Lonestar to explain the position.  
66. Mr Toriola did not even mention the January 2016 price adjustment in his first witness 
statement, and did not suggest it was a response to the DDOS Attacks in his second wit ness 
statement. That suggestion emerged for the first time in cross -examination, but was  
thoroughly unconvincing , and wholly inconsistent with the documentation . 
67. The consequences of allowing HVCs to access DYO , while retaining access to Lonestar’s 
superior  voice network, were instant and entirely predictable:  
i) Lonestar reversed the fall in HVCs, to the point of gaining HVCs between December 
2015 and February 2016.  
ii) With the influx of HVCs, the minutes of use on the DYO package increased  by 13%.  
iii) Its customer c hurn (the number of customers leaving its networ k) reduced.

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
20 
 iv) However, the price of that was that its ARPU dropped from $14.30 on October 2015 
to $9.90 in January 2016, as HVCs who had previously made calls at higher tariffs 
now made them on the DYO  tariff. 
v) In the wake of that, the differential in the combined voice/data ARPU between 
Lonestar and Orange Liberia fell from $1 in December to $0.17 in January, and to 
minus $0.13 in February.  
68. There is evidence of t wo large attacks on the Lonestar network on 6 and (to a lesser extent) 
7 February 2016 , albeit the effect of the evidence is that these attacks had much less effect 
on the Lonestar network than the October 2015 attacks:  
i) Documents referred to by Mr Campbell, and the Threema chat between Mr Kaye and 
Mr Marz iano, are consistent with attacks at this time . 
ii) Traffic utilisation graphs, which show two short periods of traffic congestion and a 
longer period of about an hour , all on 6 February 2016.  
iii) Once again, a formal report was obtained from Huawei  which referre d to attacks on 
6 February, and confirms their duration, and suggests that traffic was normal by 7 
February.  The absence of such reports in respect of other dates in the January -June 
period is consistent  with the limited number of DDOS Attacks in the first  half of 2016 . 
iv) Mr Osho in the Q1 2016 CEO Report stated  “some episodes of DDOS attacks were 
experienced again in February albeit at a much less sever ity than was experienced last 
year”.  
69. A Huawei report refers to a small and fully mitigated  attack on 8 Febr uary 2016 . While Mr 
Campbell refers to an email from Mr Bowier of that date linking an issue with network 
performance with the DDOS attack, Huawei’s investigation showed that this was not in fact 
the case , and the broad effect of communications at this tim e is that the network was running 
normally on this date (e.g. Huawei stated that they were “not finding any abnormality” and 
that traffic was following “its normal trend”) . The Threema messages relied upon by Mr 
Campbell to support an attack on 20 February  do not support that conclusion (the IP address 
in question not being Lonestar’s). Nor is there anything to suggest that Lonestar perceived, 
from a business perspective, that its data offering faced a threat from the DDOS Attacks 
which could reduce usage o r cause it to lose  customers. In February 2016, Lonestar 
removed the (small) data component of its DYO offering , effectively increasing its data 
pricing. It is difficult to see why these steps  would have been taken if the DDOS Attacks 
had been perceived as  presenting a material threat to the data business at this time. There is 
no evidence, however, of the DDOS Attacks even being discussed in this context.  
70. The technical evidence suggests that there were a number of small, and mitigated, DDOS 
attacks in Marc h and the first four days of April, with the cleaning capacity of the Huawei 
system not being exceeded on any day during those two months  (and indeed on the figures 
used by Mr Campbell, Lonestar’s network capacity was not exceeded at all during those 
two m onths) . Mr Campbell does not identify any document said to be supportive of data 
attacks during this period . The Q1 and Q2 CEO Reports do not refer to any DDOS attacks 
between March and June, nor d o the Ops Reviews for March and April.

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
21 
 71. It is necessary to interrupt the narrative relating to the DDOS Attacks at this point to address 
two significant market developments in April 2016.  
72. The first is that Orange Liberia launched 4G data services (also known as LTE). The 
attraction of a 4G data  offering to HVC customers is obvious, and the introduction of 4G 
had an immediate impact on Orange Liberia’s data traffic  (as did Lonestar’s introduction 
of its 4G data offering, 9 months later) : 
 
73. While Mr Toriola sought to suggest that the challenges of dealing with the DDOS Attacks 
had delayed the introduction of Lonestar ’s 4G  offering, there were no contemporaneous 
documents supporting this assertion, and on the contrary it is clear from the 2016 Q1, Q2, 
Q3 and Q4 CEO Reports that there we re delays in tendering for the project (which was not 
completed until June 2016) and in procuring the necessary equipment (because of the need 
to set up the letters of credit necessary to import it). 
74. The second is that Lonestar reduced its PAYG voice and d ata prices by between 30% and 
45%.  Once again, contemporary documents do not suggest that this decision was taken in 
response to the effects of the DDOS Attacks  (and, in fairness, Mr Toriola did not suggest 
that it was) . The Q2 2016 CEO Report stated that “Attritional Price war and competition 
value destruction result ed to a review across Voice and Data PAYG tariff adjustments of 
up to -30% in voice and -45% in data”. The same document, when addressing the factors 
impacting “QoQ core Voice and Data revenue negatively” , referred to various factors, 
including “LTE network launch in April giving undue data advantage”, but said nothing 
about the DDOS Attacks.  It also referred to HVC ARPU declining “as more HVC now

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
22 
 migrating to $1 for 3 days”: another sign of the  lure of low prices for HVC s customers . 
75. Inevitably, the reduction in Lonestar’s prices had an immediate impact on its ARPU. The 
ARPU differential between Lonestar and Orange fell 39c between March and April 2016, 
and by 70c from March 2016 to June 2016.  
76. The technical data does not reveal any effects of DDOS attack s on the system in May and 
June 2016, and, once again, there are no references to DDOS attacks in the Ops Reviews 
for those months, or in the Q2 CEO Report. Mr Campbell did not identify any documen ts 
said to evidence the effects of DDOS attacks in June 2016, but he does point to 5 documents 
said to evidence effects on six days in May. I accept that there is material suggestive of “a 
possible DDOS attack” on 11 May, which impacted Lonestar’s mobile m oney service for 
2 hours. The material relied upon as evidence of the effect of attacks on 17 and 19 May 
concern a complaint by a customer located in South Afric a which was investigated by 
Huawei, who thought that DDOS “should not be an issue”. In the even t, the issue appears 
to have been the result of the customer attempting to use a port on a subnet which had been 
blacklisted by internet providers. On 18 May, Huawei noted traffic congestion on a 
particular VLAN, but there is nothing to suggest that this w as the result of a DDOS attack, 
and no DDOS attack traffic was detected by the Huawei system on that date. The email 
exchange relied upon in relation to 26 -27 May is inconclusive, and there is no record of a 
DDOS attack on 26 May.  
77. Lonestar’s business perfo rmance at the end of Q2 2016 was disappointing – ARPU was 
14% below budget on a YTD basis, revenue 23% below budget, and EBITDA 37% below 
budget. The executives task ed with presenting those unhappy figures to senior management 
would no doubt have welcomed the opportunity to blame them on a supervening and 
unpredictable event such as the DDOS Attacks. However, no such suggestion was made . 
The ARPU and EBITDA figures were attributed to the two pricing decisions, and Orange 
Liberia’s launch of 4G/LTE.  The CEO’ s report for Q2 2016 attributed the reduction in 
MOU to limits placed on Lonestar’s DYO package (“MOU declined by 10% against Q1, 
driven by $1 for 3 days availability throttling for 6 hours daily. The adjustment has now 
been lifted and MOU is now on the in crease”  – throttling being a limit on voice calling 
during peak hours ). Nor did the July 2016 document , “Data Strategy and GTM Plan”, in a 
considered “SWOT” survey of Lonestar’s business, identify the DDOS Attacks as a 
weakness or a threat. This document i ncluded a detailed survey of changes in Lonestar’s 
data customers from Q3 2015 to Q2 2016, with a view to determining whether customers 
who had stopped using Lonestar’s data offering had changed their Lonestar voice spend to 
a greater extent than those who  had not. There was no material reduction in the voice spend 
by those who had stopped using data  and those who had not.  That is very difficult to 
reconcile with Lonestar’s case theory that attacks whose technical effects were limited to 
its data network ma terially impacted its voice earnings, because unhappy customers voice 
spending “followed”  their data spend.  
D4(4) July to August 2016  
78. In or around July 2016, Mr Kaye gai ned access to the “vDOS” booter platform, and in 
September 2016, to the Mirai botnet.

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
23 
 79. A new, and more serious, phase of the DDOS Attacks began in the second half of July.  
Significantly, on 24 July 2016, Mr Toriola received his first communication on the subject 
of DDOS since 7 February, and on 25 July, Mr Bowier sent an email referr ing to attacks 
the previous  week, and comparing them with what happened “during our last DDOS attack 
in February”.   
80. The technical data shows no attack traffic from 1 to 17 July, then a significant increase in 
DDOS attacks in the last 10 days of July and th e first two weeks of August. The attacks 
were within the cleaning capacity of Lonestar’s cleaning system (which was further 
enhanced on 25 July when the Arbor Peakflow system became operational).  
81. Mr Campbell has pointed to documents said to show the effec ts of DDOS attacks on 
Lonestar’s network on 12 days in July and 16 days in August (either directly, or as 
consequences of mitigating measures put in place to deal with DDOS attacks). While I am 
not satisfied that all of these documents establish the occurr ence of effective DDOS attacks, 
I am persuaded that there were 8-10 days in the second half of July when DDOS attacks 
had noticeable effects on Lonestar’s system. An email from Mr Bowier of 25 July refers to 
Lonestar being “under serious DDOS UDP flooding for a week” which “caused all of our 
data services to run very slow”. A Huawei report also refers to attacks from 28 -31 July.  
82. From 29 July, the evidence suggests that a modification to the mitigation software proved 
effective in countering the new wave of attacks, albeit a network modification on 14 August 
provided a brief opportunity for the DDOS Attacks to penetrate Lonestar’s defences  once 
again . There was an effective attack on 17 August, leading to the installation of another 
defensive measure, the Lev el 3 NPS service, on that date. Issues resulting from the 
implementation of anti -DDOS measures continued to have effects on the network to 21 
August. An email from Mr Chingwena  suggests that, by the evening of 21 August, the 
effects had been overcome. Ther e are no documents which evidence DDOS attacks from 
22-25 August.  
83. On 26 August, Mr Kaye switched the form of the DDOS Attacks to TCP SYN attacks , 
which were able to bypass the defensive measures currently in place. It took Lonestar a few 
days to arrive at a satisfactory means of dealing with the new form of attack, without the 
defensive measures themselves impacting the user experience . This appears to have taken 
until 29 August, and Mr Campbell does not point to any documents suggestive of ongoing 
effects on 30 and 31 August.  
84. The July and August Ops Reviews mentioned this next wave of effective DDOS attacks, as 
did the Q3 CEO Report. While the July report did not seek to link Lonestar’s financial 
performance with the attacks, as opposed to pricing decisions  and dealer issues, the August 
report discussed a 45% decline in mobile data revenue and attributed it to the DDOS 
Attacks. The Q3 2016 CEO Report also referred to “DDOS attac k on the network 
negatively impairing customers data experience with a correlated  drop in Data revenue 
thereof”. There was no attempt to suggest that the DDOS Attacks had caused the reduction 
in voice revenues, which w as attributed to the reduction in prices following the April 2016 
review and the increasing use by HVCs of Lonestar’s DYO offering.  
D4(5) September to October 2016

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
24 
 85. The technical data suggests that Lonestar’s defensive measures, supplemented from 7 
September 2016 by the Arbor Cloud system, were  largely effective in dealing with any 
DDOS attacks up to the last day of October. For by far the greater part of this period, very 
little traffic was detected, and attacks on 28 September and 4 and 5 October were well 
within the cleaning capacity of the systems. Mr Campbell points to documents which he 
suggests evidence effecti ve attacks on 4 days in September and 7 days in October. As to 
these:  
i) I accept that the installation of the Arbour Cloud on 7 September did entail a service 
interruption, and that this is fairly characterised as a consequence of the DDOS 
Attacks in general . 
ii) The emails concerning website access and slow internet issues between 23 and 26 
September appear to have been linked to a change in the 3G browsing subnet address  
rather than issues related to the DDOS Attacks . 
iii) The email of 4 October is consistent with t he technical data, but states that the attack 
was “fully mitigated” and “no service affected”.  
iv) The emails relating to 11 October concerning an internet link involving Orange 
Liberia and Lonestar are inconclusive, and in any event, the technical data did no t 
detect any DDOS attack s on that day.  
v) The emails relating to 19 -23 October concern a number of issues. There is a DDOS 
attack detected at 16.51 on 19 October and cleaned in 9 minutes  with an email of that 
date stating “no impact on traffic observed” ; the email cited for 21 and 22 October 
concerned Arbor enquiring whether Lonestar wanted to continue to pay for the service 
when no attack had been observed for a number of days (and from which it is clear 
that no traffic had been cleaned for 13 days); and the emails relating to 23 October 
are inconclusive, traffic flow was normal at that time and no DDOS traffic was 
detected.  
86. I accept that there was a perception by some within Lonestar of ongoing adverse effects 
either from the DDOS Attacks or the measures taken to address them. The September Ops 
Review referred to the Arbor software helping to ease the attacks, but also to “co ntinuous 
DDOS attacks resulting in poor data experience” (albeit data revenue was 18% up on 
August, data subscribers 9% up and data revenue from HVCs 47% up). The October O ps 
Review referred to “Fluctuation in Data Experience”, and referred to the major at tack on 
31 October which I discuss be low. However, data revenue growth was 7% up on  a “month -
on-month” basis.  
87. I accept that the contemporaneous documents provide some support for Lonestar’s 
argument that, by September or October, the DDOS Attacks were havi ng an impact on its 
data revenue. The September Ops Review refers to “revenue loss DUE to DDOS attack” 
and to putting in place “DD[O]S Attack Control” to “address poor data performance”. The 
October Ops Review refers to “fluctuation in Data Experience … af fecting uptake of data 
bundles”. However, the Ops Reviews do not suggest that there was any impact on its voice 
revenue, the adverse state of which is attributed to other causes.

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
25 
 D4(6) 31 October  2016  to February 2017  
88. From 31 October 2016, Mr Kaye had acce ss to the Mirai #14 botnet, and this led to a marked 
increase in the severity of DDOS attacks to which Lonestar was subjected. These attacks 
were particularly effective between 31 October and 2 November, when the attacks and the 
mitigating software caused internet slowness and loss of data traffic, and generated 
significant international press commentary between 3 and 7 November. That commentary 
inevitably presented a rather dramatic account of the attacks which, equally inevitably, 
featured prominently in Lonestar’s case at trial. Lonestar’s internal assessment on 3 
November noted:  
i) the unprecedented size of the attacks ; and  
ii) that th ey had inevitably caused “ some undesirable behaviors, especially slowness and 
loss of data traffic ”.  
89. That is a more sober asses sment tha n the press coverage, and Orange Liberia draws 
attention to the assessment of one cyber -security expert describing the “breathless” press 
coverage as exaggerated. However, even if the press coverage did “over -egg” the impact 
of the DDOS Attacks on  Lonestar’s network, those public statements will have constituted  
another way in which the DDOS A ttacks will have damaged perceptions of Lonestar’s data 
offering.  
90. So far as the period between 3 and 20 November is concerned, there were periods on 4, 10 
and 14 November when their scale appears to have overrun the cleaning capacity of the 
mitigation systems. Mr Campbell does not identify any documents said to evidence the 
effects of DDOS attacks for 5 -6, 8, 12, 15 -18 and 25 -27 November.  
91. Over the period fro m 20 to 23 November, the DDOS Attacks took advantage of a “direct 
peering” connection Lonestar had with Facebook , Google and YouTube ’s websites , 
allowing “dirty” traffic to circumvent the mitigation softwar e. There was an element of “cat 
and mouse”, with L onestar taking steps to close one “back door”, by closing the direct 
peering with a particular site, only for Mr Kaye to try another “back door”. Lonestar worked 
hard with external contractors to come up with a solution, which was put in place in the 
cours e of 24 November, and appears to have solved the issue.  
92. Nonetheless, it is clear that the cumulative effect of the DDOS Attacks had caused a 
customer backlash against Lonestar’s data offering. The November 2016 Ops Review 
identified as a key challenge “DDO S impact on Data quality creating negative experience 
and backlash from customer. MoM Data volume declined by 20million MB”. Further , one  
slide stated,  “Top 20 MoM Data revenue significantly declined as a result of DDoS attacks 
and some subscribers that ha ve moved their data to competition are also moving voice” . 
There is a dispute as to whethe r this is a reference to lost subscribers, or to reduced usage  
by those continuing to use Lonestar for some voice . As to this:  
i) An analysis within Lon estar which is ro ughly contemporaneous with this document 
looked at  86,000 subscribers who had stopped using Lonestar’s data services  in 
August 2016, and found that 35,000 continued to use other services, and 51,000 had 
left Lon estar’s network entirely. The analysis does n ot suggest that the voice ARPU

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
26 
 for those who remained fell appreciably.  
ii) The November Ops Review “Top 20 Downgraded Subscriber” analysis showed voice 
revenue increasing (albeit by only 1%) while data revenue fell by 33%, and for HVCs, 
voice revenue increase d by 3%, minutes of use increase d by 6% and data revenue fell 
by 30%.  That does not support a view that the DDOS Attacks were having any 
significant effect on voice traffic.  
93. In these circumstances, I  am not persuaded  that, as at November 2016, Lonestar had  formed 
the view that the DDOS Attacks had appreciably reduced usage by retained voice 
customers, as opposed to contributing to the churn of customers who left Lonestar 
altogether.  I also note that Lonestar’s “Recovery Plan” prepared in November 2016 refer red 
to four reasons why such a plan was required. Relevantly for present purposes, it referred 
to: 
i) “Response and matching competitor value destroying offer of $1 for 3 days led to 
significant loss of Voice revenue”; and  
ii) “Persistent Cyber -attack  via DDOS de graded all data service a nd thus resulting in 
further revenue loss on Data”.  
It was still Lonestar’s considered analysis, therefore, that the impact of DDOS attacks on 
its revenue was essentially on revenue from data services.  
94. Turning to December , Mr Campb ell points to documents said to evidence the effects of 
DDOS  attacks on various dates. I accept that there is evidence of the DDOS Attacks  
impact ing Lonestar’s internet services on various dates up to 15 December, whether the 
direct impact of D DOS Attacks or as results of a djustments to the Arbor Peakflow onsite 
APS system which Lonestar installed at the end of November . Once fully operational, this 
new system would ensure that no t all attack traffic had to be routed to the Arbor Cloud to 
be dealt with, minimising the impact of Lonestar’s defensive systems on those using its 
network. However, it was only from 15 December that the new defensive systems were 
fully functioning. Those s ystems largely contained the DDOS Attacks from that date, save 
for what appear to have been relatively minor effects on 18 and 23 December.  
95. The December Ops Review referred once again to “the continuous DDOS attacks”, and to 
a “fluctuation ” but it noted a 34% increase in data revenue compared with the preceding 
month, while recognising the adverse effects which the DDOS Attacks had had on data 
revenues YTD.  The Q4 CEO Report also referred to the growth in the number of data 
subscribers (14%) “despit e consistent DDOS attacks since July 2016” , growth concentrated 
in September (9%) and December (9%). There is also evidence that Lonestar had adjusted 
its data pricing in response to the DDOS Attacks and Orange Liberia’s 4G/LTE offering, 
Mr Osho referring to a “300% bonus on data bundles to entice and retain Data Users in the 
mi[d]st of the DDoS attacks and to also mitigate the impact of the competition LTE 
expansion”. The is the first documented suggestion of any reduction in Lonestar’s data 
prices by reas on of the DDOS Attacks. Mr Osho also noted the voice usage was up over 
Q3 (just as Q3 had been significantly up over Q2), but that voice revenues were down 
because “price war and competition value destruction remains a factor in the market as

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
27 
 subscribers s pend continue to dec rease while traffic increases”. The loss in data revenue to 
the DDOS Attacks had not, therefore, contributed to a reduction in voice usage , and the 
reduction in voice revenue  was the result of ongoing price competition. The Revised 
Dece mber Recovery Plan (prepared under Mr Toriola’s direction) is to similar effect, 
identifying DDOS and 4G/LTE as the reason for lost data revenue, and the  DYO  offer as 
the reason for lost voice revenue, both on an “all customer” basis, and for HVCs when 
considered separately. The report noted th e “attacks easing out”, as a result of the mitigation 
measures taken, but that matters were “under observation ” and subject to “ further 
optimisation”.  
96. Another document produced in December 2016, the “Top 20 Downgraded  Subscribers 
Analysis”, recorded a drop o f voice revenue (63% between October and November 2016) 
and MOU (by 58%). It observed that “this drop is a result of a high movement of subscribers 
to $1 for 3 day calls On -net Calls and $1 a day On -net calls + call s to USA and Canada”. 
However, it also states “as was shown in our previous analysis on the slide below, most of 
the Data Subscribers move their voice spend where their data spend is, and with the planned 
LTE Advanced launched, an aggressive data win back campaign is set to be targeted at 
thes[ e] for revenue growth a [n]d upgrade back to the Top 20 segment”. The attached slide 
is headed “DDOS Impact on Data Users and Total Spend: Poor Data Experience Impacting 
Other Revenue”. It only analysed the position ac ross three months – July, August and 
September 2016. The analysis  indicated that of the data subscribers in July 2016 who 
stopped using data in August and September, 60% left the network altogether ( i.e., became 
lost subscribers) and there was a slow MoM decrease in spend for the others “as they slowly 
moved their spend to where they are using data”. The figures on this chart are something 
of a curiosity, because the average voice spend of 86,000 subscribers in July 2016 is $3.04. 
The average voice spend of those still on the network in August but no longer using data i s 
higher than that - $5. The position in September is $4.53, still above the July figure.  
97. In January 2017 , the technical data shows no or negligible attack traffic making  it through 
the Arbor APS or Cloud systems, and reaching the final line of defence in the form of the 
Huawei system. Mr Campbell has pointed to documents which he suggests evidence the 
effects of DDOS Attacks on 13 days. I accept that there were some effec ts on 18 -19 and 30 
January, and brief effects while the Arbor filters were fine -tuned. Beyond that, I am not 
persuaded that there were any significant effects during this period.  The January 2017 Ops 
Review refers to the success of the mitigation strategy,  although it continues to refer to 
“data fluctuations” caused by the DDOS Attacks as a “key challenge”.  
98. In January 2017, the Liberian government imposed a tax on mobile phone usage of 1c per 
minute. While Orange Liberia absorbed that tax themselves , Lonest ar sought to pass it on. 
The results of that decision were instant and dramatic. The Ops Review referred to a “huge 
subscr iber shift, with a 32% decline in MTN RGS 1 between 15th to 31st" ( i.e., over a one -
day period). There was an 18% drop in voice revenu e within 2 weeks, and a  36% reduction 
in voice minutes of use. An RGS 30 comparison (looking at subscribers who had not used 
the Lonestar network for 30 days) showed voice subscribers leaving Lonestar for Orange 
Liberia in similar proportions across all va lue segments – further confirmation that price 
matter ed to HVCs as well as other customers. By contrast, Lonestar’s data business reaped 
immediate benefits from the launch of 4G/LTE, just as Orange Liberia had (see the figure 
at [72] above).

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
28 
 99. The DDOS Attac ks came to an end in early February 2017. Large attacks continue d up to 
8 February, when they were largely mitigated by the defensive systems, with smaller attacks 
thereafter (including after Mr Kaye had been arrested on 22 February). Mr Campbell points 
to documents which he says evidence the effects of DDOS attacks on 6 days  in the period 
up to and including 8 February . I accept that the setting of the filters on the Arbor systems 
did cause issues affecting some websites during this period, and that this is fairly 
characterised as a consequence of the DDOS Attacks generally.  It is not suggested that the 
DDOS Attacks had any effects after 8 February .  
100. The February Ops Review highlighted the success of the DDOS containment programme, 
and did not refer to the DDOS Attacks causing loss of revenue. It did, however, note the 
ongoing effects of the decision to pass on the tax, with a 28% decline in voice revenue, and 
loss of customers in similar proportions across all value segments. The  Q1 2017 CEO 
Report said tha t the decision had caused “a mass exit of over 200,000 subscribers” and a 
45% reduction in minutes of use against the previous quarter.  
101. In September 2017, Lonestar prepared its budget for 2018.  One slide in this document 
identified “key events and market” shifts in the left-hand  column, and “impact on MTN 
Liberia’s Current State” in the right -hand  column. It included the following entries:  
Key events and market shifts  Impact on MTN Liberia’s Current State  
Responded to the Value Destroying 
Offer from compet ition – Free Calls for 
3 Days  Significant loss of Voice Revenue (from 
$114m in 2012 to $48.5m in 2016)  
Persistent  Cyber attack via DDOS  Loss of HVCs due t o poor data quality  
Competition l [a]unched 3G & LTE 
almost 9 mo [n]ths ahead of MTN  Competition have a clear lead on data and 
hence most HVCS have moved to 
competition  
102. It is striking that this document attributes the fall in voice revenue solely to DYO, it 
identifies the effect of the DDOS Attacks as loss of HVCs “due to poor data quality”, and 
attributes the loss of HVCs to Orange Liberia’s “clear lead on data”. Slide 19 in the same 
deck also stated  “DDOS Attacks took HV customers away from Data” (and “DYO 
unconditionally discounted voice”).  While there is a reference to “lost customer preference 
as primary SIM”, this is linked to the fact that certain products “had been designed to auto -
renew and deduct balance ”, and that “’Fear of Losing Balance’ has driven customers away 
from Higher Denomi nation recharges”.  There are a number of references  in the documents  
to this issue having a negative impact on revenue. It has nothing to do with the DDOS 
Attacks, but reflected the fact that “all digital products were designed to auto -renew causing 
custom er complaints on credit depletion”.

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
29 
 D5(7) Overview  
103. In June 2018, Lonestar produced a timeline of the DDOS Attacks as follows:  
 
104. This analysis is not entirely consistent with the conclusions I have drawn from the technical 
data and contemporary documents – the attacks of 6 and 7 February are not mentioned, and 
the level of attacks in October 2016 is overstated in respect of the period prior to 31 October. 
But in broad terms, the summary correctly captures the sequence of events: initial impacts 
in October, a nd again from July 2016, with a new level of intensity in November 2016, and 
full stability by February 2017.  
105. That broad pattern is consistent with numerous other pieces of evidence:  
i) The severity index  prepared by Lonestar and provided to Mr Nicholson, and  which 
he reproduced at paragraph 5.7 of his first report , which shows severe attacks in 
October dropping off in early November, a brief spike of activity on two days in 
February and then nothing of significance until July.  
ii) Mr Campbell’s evidence that “prior to July 2016 the mitigation systems Lonestar had 
in place were generally capable of defending against the DDOS attacks directed at 
Lonestar”.  I do not accept that this statement was limited to volumetric attacks (not 
least because Mr Campbell was cl early concerned with all attacks). The date was 
significant because it was Mr Kaye’s access to a vDOS booter in that month which 
Mr Campbell suggests cha nged the position . 
iii) The agreement of the quantum experts that Lonestar lost no subscribers as a result o f 
the DDOS Attacks before September 2016.  
iv) The analysis of state exhaustion and application layer attacks which were detected  
(“SYN flood” and “SYN -ACK”), which shows such attacks in October 2015, a few 
in November, 6 and 7 February and 19 July.  
v) The 18 date s on which Mr Shepherd identifies attacks exceeding the network and 
defensive capacity of Lonestar’s network all fall within the three clusters of October  
2015 , July 2016 and from 31 October  2016 .

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
30 
 vi) The dates on which there is both attack traffic in excess o f Lonestar’s bandwidth 
capacity and a document said by Mr Campbell to evidence the effects of DDOS 
Attacks  (assuming, contrary to my conclusions, that each document he identifies does 
evidence the effects of a DDOS Attack on the date in question) : 16 days in October 
2015, a single da y in November 2015, 3 days in February 2016, 11 days in July and 
6 days in August 2016, 5 days in November, 3 days in December and 6 days in 
January and February 2017.  
vii) The timing of emails to Mr Toriola about the DDOS Attacks – four in October 2015, 
an email in February 2016 , three  email s in July 2016 , 14 in August, 5 in September, 
one in October, three in November, 4 in December, 12 in January and 5 in February . 
viii) The evidence given by Lonestar’s then -CEO, Mr Babutunde Osho, in the English 
criminal proceedings on 6 July 2017, which referred to “consistent DDOS attacks 
between September 2016 and February 2017” (although, as will be apparent, the 
estimate of loss of r evenue of US$17.6m he gave to the court has not been 
substantiated by the evidence before me).  
ix) Lonestar’s closing, which, when identifying documents for the court’s revie w, 
pointed to an email of 21 October  2015 , an email of 6 January 2016 (which I am 
satisfied was referring to an issue which was not in fact the product of a DDOS 
Attack, the IP address in question not being one which saw any “dirty traffic”, and 
other websites being accessible), 7 February  2016 , a report of 1 August 2016 referring 
to attack s in July,  a report covering the period July to September  2016 , three emails 
in November 2016 and an email from January 2017 referring to attacks “over the last 
few months”.  
106. A funding request prepared by Lonestar in October 2017 conveys a broadly similar 
message, as does Lonestar’s YTD Business Review and 5 -Year Plan of June 2018.  
D6 The Arrest, Prosecution and Conviction of Mr Kaye  and Subsequent Events  
107. The DDOS attacks ended in February 2017. On 22 February 2017, Mr Kaye was arrested 
by the NCA at Luton a irport pursuant to an international arrest warrant concerning a 
number of alleged cyber -attacks. He was extradited to German y on 2 March 2017 and 
charged with offences relating to a cyber -attack on Deutsche Telekom. He was interviewed 
by the Cologne Prosec utor, in the course of which he admitted that he was the person 
responsible for carrying out the DDOS Attacks on Lonestar, that he had done so at the 
request and direction of Mr Marziano and that Mr Marziano had introduced him to Mr 
Polani  who had provided  technical support and assistance as necessary . 
108. A report produced by the Cologne Prosecutor records that a mobile phone found on Mr 
Kaye when he was arrested contained Mr Marziano’s telephone number and email, Mr 
Polani’s email, numerous messages between Mr Kaye and Mr Marziano concerning the 
DDOS Attacks, sent via SMS, WhatsApp  and Facebook  Messenger, and messages between 
Mr Kaye and Mr Pol ani on Threema which showed that Mr Polani was “in contact with 
Kaye on several occ asions in order to check whether the attacks had been successful or to 
report on the impact in Liberia”.

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
31 
 109. In March 2017, the Liberian government withdr ew the 1 cent per minute tax it had imposed 
in January 2017 (see [ 98] above ). 
110. On 28 July 2017, Mr Kaye ple aded guilty to the charges made against him by the Cologne 
Prosecutor and received a suspended sentence of 20 months’ imprisonment.  The judgment 
of the court records Mr Kaye making a “full confession” that “he had intended to create a 
botnet in order to ul timately cause harm to the Liberian company” ( i.e., Lonestar), the 
purpose of that statement being  to suggest  that he had not acted to harm Deutsche Telekom.  
111. In August 2017, Mr Kaye was extradited back to the United Kingdom where he was charged 
with offenc es under the Computer Misuse Act 1990, including in relation to the DDOS 
Attacks. Mr Kaye initially pleaded not guilty, but he changed his plea and entered guilty 
pleas to two offences under the Computer Misuse Act 1990 and one offence under the 
Proceeds o f Crime Act 2002, in relation to the DDOS Attac ks. On 11 January 2019, he was 
sentenced to 32 months’ imprisonme nt. 
112. In September 2019, the Liberian government imposed a floor cap on both voice and data 
services that effectively outlawed unlimited calling p romotions such as $1 -3 days  and 
DYO . 
E LIBERIAN LAW  
E1 Introduction  
113. It is common ground that Lonestar’s claims are governed by Liberian law. Liberia has a 
common law system, in which decisions of the Liberian Supreme Court constitut e a source 
of law , alongside legislation .  
114. Section 40 of the Liberian “General Construction Law” provides:  
“Except as modified by laws now in force and those which may hereafter be enacted 
by the Liberian common law, the following shall be, when applicable, considered 
Liberian law:  
(a) the rules adopted for chancery proceedings in England, and  
(b) the common law and usages of the courts of England and of the United States 
of America, as set forth in case law and in Blackstone’s and Kent’s 
Commentaries and  in other authoritative treatises and digests”.  
115. This statute was referred to by the parties as the Reception Statute , although in contrast to 
some reception statutes (e.g. s.3 of the (Singapore) Application of English Law Act 1993), 
it was common ground th at it does not provide for the incorporation of a body of law at a 
particular date , but “the common law  ... as it stands at the time when those laws are adopted 
and applied in a particular case, and thus not necessarily the law as it stood at the time when  
the Reception Statute was enacted”. It was also common ground that the Reception Statute 
did not “require the Liberian Supreme Court to prefer United States common law principles 
to English common law principles, or vice -versa”, but that in practice “the Liberian 
Supreme Court looks more often and primarily to United States treatises, digests and case

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
32 
 law rath er than to English law treatises, digests and case law”.  The frequency of recourse 
to the Reception Statute  was in issue.  
116. There were a number of disa greements between the Liberian law experts as to how the 
Reception Statute  operated , which it is convenient to address  at this stage of the judgment.  
In particular, Counsellor  Padmore and Professor Banks argued that the Reception Statute 
did not “accord au tomatic status” to the common law of England and the United States, 
even if there was no Liberian statute or common law in force . Rather, they contend that the 
effect of the words “if applicable” was that it was only when the Liberian Supreme Court 
(as the  only court capable of generating decisions with the status of binding precedents) 
reviewed and accepted the relevant English or US common law that these provisions 
became part of Liberian common law . Counsellor Musu -Scott’s evidence was that the 
Reception  Statute “confirms and maintains the common law of England and of the United 
States as part of the law of Liberia” on any issue not covered by Liberian statute or the case 
law of the Supreme Court of Liberia.  
117. As is often the case, the debate between the ex perts assumed a form in which each criticised 
an extreme version of the other’s contention. Th us Counsellor Musu -Scott suggested that 
Counsellor  Padmore and Professor Banks were arguing for the position that only the 
Liberian Supreme Court could decide whe ther or not a particular rule of US or English 
common law should form part of Liberian law, in circumstances in which the jurisdiction 
of the Supreme Court was  only appellate rather than original, and the cases of the lower 
courts which reached the Supreme  Court on appeal would, on this theory, never raise issues 
of this kind because this would not be a source of law open to them. For their part, 
Counsellor  Padmore and Professor Banks suggested that it was the inevitable consequence 
of Counsellor  Musu -Scott ’s theory that all principles of common law of England and 
Wales, and of all fifty of the United States and the federal jurisdiction, the contents of 
Blackstone , Kent  and other “authoritative treatises  and digests” were all automatically 
binding on a first instance judge, even though they might well conflict inter se . 
118. I am satisfied that, as the Reception Statute now falls to be applied, the normative force of 
the common law as it has developed in England and Wales in Liberia n court decisions is 
much attenuated. I cannot accept that it is binding in the sense that a first instance judge 
would be obliged to follow English law on an issue which Liberian statutes or case law had 
yet to address,  not least because of the possibilit y for conflict between the various legal 
sources identified in s.40. I accept that English common law is given a higher status than, 
say, the decisions of German or Italian courts, and indeed formally at least than the 
decisions of common law jurisdictions  such as India or Canada. However, the constraint 
which s.40 of the Reception Statute places on the law -making power of the judge is, in my 
view, very limited  indeed . I am satisfied that English case law, for example, would have 
less normative force before  a Liberian court than decisions of the European Court of Human 
Rights would have before an English court by virtue of s.2 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  
To the extent that it has any impact on the freedom of action of a Liberian judge when 
deciding the con tent of Liberian law, the judge would retain a “strong” rather than “weak” 
discretion. The language of Liberian case law reflects that , for example Quelo v Providence 
Concrete Works [1981] LRSC 29, 301, in which the Liberian Supreme Court held that when 
determining whether or not to apply some principle of foreign law under the Reception 
Statute, “we should weigh all the benefits and choose the blessings”.

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
33 
 119. I am also satisfied that, to the extent that the Reception Statute influenced  the decision of 
the Libe rian judge, it is to U .S. rather than English sources that the judge would principally 
look. That is not because the Reception Statute creates any formal hierarchy as between the 
two – it clearly does not – but because of the very close links between Liber ia and the 
U.S.A. since Liberia’s  foundation, the heavy influence which U.S. statutes have had for 
Liberia’s lawmakers, and the extent to which Liberian legal education ha s exposed its 
lawyers to U.S. rather than English influences . That reflects the posit ion of all the experts 
in the joint memorandum, and the cases I was referred to which, with one exception ( Miller 
v Parker [1982] LRSC 73 dealing, of all things, with the presumption that a conveyance 
into two or more names creates a joint tenancy), involv ed the application of principles of 
U.S. law.  
120. It might be wondered why it would matter so much whether, in the field of civil liability 
for wrongs, a Liberian court, faced with a gap in its own law, would look to U.S. or English 
sources to fill that gap. The answer to that question leads to what, for me at least, was one 
of the great forensic mysteries in this case.  As it is relevant to both the ways in which 
Lonestar puts its case (an action of damages for wrong under existing  Liberian law, or the 
applica tion of the English torts of lawful or unlawful means conspiracy or unlawful 
interference under the Reception Statute), I should address  the issue  at this stage . 
E2 The Issue of Direct Actionability  
121. Whe ther there can be tortious liability where someone, whether acting alone or with others, 
has caused the claimant loss by unlawful acts without those acts themselves being 
actionable at the suit of the claimant has proved a controversial topic under English law:  
i) For the purposes of the tort of unlaw ful means conspiracy, there were a number of 
cases which supported the view that the unlawful means had to be actionable at the 
suit of the victim against at least one of the conspirators. The decision of the House 
of Lords in Lonrho v Shell (No 2) [1982] AC 173  was interpreted by some judges as 
creating such a requirement ( e.g., Michaels v Taylor [2001] Ch 493).  
ii) That interpret ation  was rejected in Revenue & Customs Commissioners v Total 
Network SL [2008] 1 AC 1174, which held that the crime of cheating the  Revenue 
could comprise an unlawful act for the purposes of unlawful means conspiracy. In 
JSC Bank v Ablyazov (No 14) [2018]  UKSC 19 [15] the Supreme Court held that “a 
criminal offence could be a sufficient unlawful means for the purpose of the law of 
conspiracy, provided that it was objectively directed against the claimant”.  
iii) However, before breach of a civil statute can prov ide the unlawful means for this tort, 
it is necessary for the statutory provision in question to be one which can be enforced 
by the claimant for the tort of breach of statutory duty ( Clerk &  Lindsell on Torts 
(23rd), [23 -113]).  
iv) In OBG v Allan  [2007] UKHL 21, the House of Lords confirmed the existence of a 
tort where one p arty interferes with the economic interests of the claim ant, by the use 
of unlawful means, and with the intention and effect of injuring the claimant. The 
principal focus of the tort is wh ere one party (A) uses unlawful means against another

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
34 
 party (B) with the intention and effect of causing loss to  a third (C) , who then s ues A. 
The three -party version of this tort requires the unlawful means to be actionable at 
the suit of B  for C to claim . 
122. In its opening, Lonestar referred to certain U .S. materials exhibited by Mr Padmore, and 
stated:  
“It is apparent from the materials which he himself exhibits that there is nothing in 
US common law which is in fact inconsistent with Lonesta r’s case under English law. 
In particular , it is plain that U .S. law rec ognises a form of secondary liability for 
conspiracy to commit a tort and to exercise unlawful means”.  
123. However, as Mr Singla KC accepted in closing, such evidence as there was in relat ion to 
the position under U .S. law supported a (majority) requirement that the unlawful means be 
actionable at the suit o r the claimant  (such that two of more persons who agree that one of 
them will commit a tort actionable at the suit of the victim can bo th be s ued by the victim) . 
124. In the Particulars of Claim, Lonestar has advanced the following claims against the 
Defendants:  
i) lawful means conspiracy ; 
ii) unlawful means conspiracy, the unlawful means being:  
a) breaches of a UK statute (s s.3(1), 3A(1) and (5) of the Computer Misuse Act 
1990) by reason of Mr Kaye’s conduct in this jurisdiction; and  
b) breach of s.76 of the Liberian Telecommunications Act 2007;  
iii) “unlawful interference”, relying on the same unlawful means;  
iv) a claim of liability under  action of damages for  wrong , a claim  said to be available  
under Liberian law for loss caused by “wrongful c onduct” , the conduct implicitly 
alleged to be wrongful including the contravention of the statutes referred to above . 
This emerges clearly from the terms of the permissio n to adduce expert evidence on 
this part of the case  which I  granted on 27 September  2021 and which permits expert 
evidence on the following issues:  
“Does Liberian law recognise a cause of action of damages for wrong?  
(i) If yes, what are the elements of this  cause of action under Liberian law?  
(ii) To the extent that one of the elements involves a “wrong”, would a breach 
of: (1) section 3 and/or 3A of the Computer Misuse Act 1990 (being a 
United Kingdom statute) or (ii) section 76 of the Liberian 
Telecommunicatio ns Act 2007 suffice to establish that element.”  
125. In addition to :

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
35 
 i) the issue of whether  a Liberian court would recognise the English torts under the 
Reception Statut e; 
there are also disputes as to whether:  
ii) to the extent it did so,  breach of foreign legislation (the Computer Misuse Act 1990) 
would be sufficient;   
iii) there was an action of damages for wrong as a matter of Liberian law  and if so:  
a) could breach of a UK statute constitute a wrong for this purpose; and  
b) did the “wrong” have to be civilly actionable at the suit of the victim.  
126. It will be apparent that none of these issues would arise to the extent that the Liberian 
Telecommunications Act 2007 ( the 2007 Act ) itself gave a civil cause of action against 
anyone who  had suffered loss as a result of a breach of its provisions.  However, while  a 
breach of s.76 of the 2007 Act was pleaded as an unlawful means for the purposes of the 
two English “unlawful means” torts, and, implicitly as one basis for the claim under the 
action of damages for wrong, no civil claim for damages was advanced under s.80 of the 
2007 Act.  
E3 The 2007 Act and the Evidence Upon it  
E3(1)  The 2007 Act  
127. Section 76 of the 2007 Act provides:  
“(1)  No person shall:  
(a) fraudulently, maliciously, or with dis honest intent, use any 
telecommunications facility or obtain any telecommunications service 
without payment of a lawful charge thereof;  
(b) intentionally, without right and with dishonest intent, access the whole or 
any part of a telecommunications network or  computer system by 
infringing security measures, with the intent of obtaining 
telecommunications or computer data;  
(c) intentionally, without right and with dishonest intent, intercept by 
technical means a transmission not intended for public reception of 
telecommunications or computer data to, from or within a 
telecommunications network or computer system;  
(d) intentionally, without right and with dishonest intent, damage, delete, 
deteriorate, alter or suppress telecommunications or computer data 
without right,  where this results in harm to any other person;  
(e) intentionally, without right and with dishonest intent, interfere with the

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
36 
 functioning of a telecommunications network or computer system by 
inputting, transmitting, damaging, deleting, deteriorating, alter ing or 
suppressing telecommunications or computer data;  
(f) intentionally, without right and with dishonest intent, possess, produce, 
sell, procure for use, import, distribute or otherwise make available a 
device, including a computer program, designed or ada pted primarily for 
the purpose of committing any of the offences established in subsections 
(1) (a), (b), (c), (d) or (e); or a computer password, access code, or similar 
data by which the whole or any part of a telecommunications network or 
computer syste m is capable of being accessed with intent that it be used 
for the purpose of committing any of the offences established in 
subsections (1) (a), (b), (c), (d) or (e);  
(g) use, or cause or suffer to be used, any telecommunications network or 
telecommunications  service for the purpose of disturbing, annoying, 
irritating, offending or harassing any person, including by means of a call 
with or without speech or other sounds, data or video images; or  
(h) wilfully damage any telecommunications network or related 
teleco mmunications facility.  
(2)  Every person who acts in contravention of this Section commits an offence and 
is liable to the penalties prescribed in Section 77.”  
128. Section 77 clearly contemplates that the s.76 offence can be committed both by natural 
persons and corporations (who can only act through natural persons) , and that the 
employees of corporations can be punished for a corporation’s breach . It provides:  
“(1)  Every person who contravenes Section 76 of this Act, and is found guilty of the 
same after being accorded due process of the law, and is guilty of the offence 
and liable:  
(a)  in the case of a natural person, to a fine not exceeding one hundred 
thousand Liberian Dollars for a first offence and two hundred and fifty 
thousand Liberian Dolla rs for a subsequent offence;  
(b)  in the case of a company or any person other than a natural person, to a 
fine not exceeding one million Liberian Dollars for a first offence and 
five million Liberian Dollars for a subsequent offence; or  
(c)  in the case of a natural person who is an officer, employee or agent of a 
company and who is responsible for the contravention, breach or failure 
by the company, imprisonment for a Term to be decided in accordance 
with the New Penal Code of the Republic of Liberi a.” 
129. Section 80, headed “Civil Liability” provides:  
“(1) Subject to any limitation of liability imposed in accordance with this Act or any

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
37 
 other act, a person who has sustained loss or damage as a result of any act or 
omission that is contrary to this Act, or contrary to any regulation, rule or order 
made under this Act may bring a civil action against any person who engaged 
in, directed, authorized, consented to or participated in the act or omission.  
 (2)  Any action brought pursuant to this Section shall be subject to the practices and 
procedures of the applicable court in such matters.”  
130. A “person” is defined by s.2(1) of the 2007 Act as “a natural or other legally recognized 
person or entity, and includes a joint stock company, a limited liability company , a 
partnership, a sole proprietorship, a joint venture, or other form of entity whether 
incorporated or unincorporated.”  
131. I now turn to t he evidence on ss.76 and 80 of the 2007 Act . 
E3(2)  Professor Banks ’ Evidence on the 2007 Act  
132. Professor Banks in his fir st report of 13 August 2021  expressed the following view s: 
i) He said that s.80 “ does not lay out a special procedur e” for the civil claim but “ in 
respect of damages suffered by a party on account of the violations, the courts would 
deem the violations to be a wrong committed against the victim, and as such would 
allow the victim to bring an action of damages for wrong or to even characterize the 
action as simply one of damages.”  
ii) He said that “it is noteworthy  … that the Liberian Telecommunications Act 2007, a t 
Section 80, does recognize that there can be civil liability arising from a violation of 
the Act where loss or damage is sustained by a person. But the section also states that 
a person may bring such ‘civil action against any person who engaged in, dire cted, 
authorized, consented to or participated in the act or omission. ’ This means that a 
person may bring a civil action against the actual perpetrator of the act or against the 
principal of the perpetrator of the act if the principal, whether a natural p erson or a 
corporate entity, ‘directed, authorized, consented to or participated in the act or 
omission ’”.  
iii) He suggested that “because the Liberian Telecommunications Act 2007 does not have 
extra -territorial effect, a person injured or damaged by the act o f another, done in a 
foreign country, cannot bring suit in the foreign country to enforce the violation of 
the Liberian Telecommunications Act 2007, although the impact of the perpetrator’s 
action is felt in Liberia. The suit would have to be brought in Li beria in a court of 
competent jurisdiction.” Orange Liberia did not raise that (surprising) contention 
before me.  
iv) That a s.80 claim “would be an action of damages for wrong, not one based on the 
theory or principle of ‘unlawful means conspiracy ’” stating h e was “of the opinion, 
and as has been the practice in civil actions which have grown out of a statutory 
prohibition, a party may rely on the common law concept of damages for wrong or 
simply action of damages which is recognized under Liberian law. Under Liberian 
law, the Liberian courts would not treat or characterize the action as a breach of a

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
38 
 statutory duty. Such characterization would only be given to the action if the Liberia 
Telecommunications Authority was the complainant and was seeking to hold th e 
violator accountable for the violation of the statutory duty or to ensure compliance 
with the Act.”  
v) That the offences under s.76 of the 2007 are grounded in intentional misconduct, 
which, together with the fact that the 2007 Act does not refer to agency,  means that 
there can be no vicarious liability under the 2007 Act.  
133. In his second report, Professor Banks expressed the view (which is not readily reconcilable 
with the view expressed in his first report) that “because the Liberia Telecommunications 
Act 20 07 is a statute and does not fall within or has not been declared, either by the statute 
or by the courts, as constituting or to be an ‘action of damages for wrong ’, but has its own 
cause of action (criminal and civil), it cannot be deemed to constitute an  “action of damages 
for wrong” ”. 
134. In his third report, Professor Banks said that the 2007 Act only imposed a liability on those 
who had “engaged in, directed, authorized, consented to or participated in the act or 
omission”, and no common law tort could be brought which imposed a liability for a breach 
of s.76 in circumstances in which it would not have arisen under s.80.  
E3(3)  Counsellor Padmore ’s Evidence on the 2007 Act  
135. In his first report, Counsellor Padmore said that s.80 did not impose  liability for an 
agreement to commit the s.76 offence, although he was careful to note that a person who 
did enter into such an agreement “may be liable for engaging in, directing, autho rizing, 
consenting to or participating in an offence.”  He said that there was no room for a civil 
liability in conspiracy for breaches of s.76.  
136. Counsellor Padmore refer red to  the 2007 Act  in passing in his second report, saying that 
there was no action for  damages for wrong under the Liberian law, with the result that the 
issue of whether a breach of s.76 of the 2007 Act could constitute such a wrong did not 
arise.  
137. In his third report, Counsellor Padmore essentially repeated the views he had expressed in 
his first report.  
E3(4)  Counsellor Musu -Scott ’s Evidence on the 2007 Act  
138. In her first report, Counsellor Musu -Scott noted that s.77 imposed penalties against the 
agents or employees of corporations for breaches of s.76, as well as the corporations 
themselves . 
139. In her second report, Counsellor Musu -Scott expressed the view that a breach of s.76 of the 
2007 Act could provide the basis f or an action of damages for wrong, pointing to various 
cases in which the breach of a statute had been held to ground such an ac tion. 
140. In her third report, Counsellor Musu -Scott stated that she did not accept that s.80 prevented 
the Liberian courts from recognising common law liability for conspiracy for breaches of

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
39 
 s.76, or that a breach of  s.76 could not form the basis of an actio n of damages for wrong, 
pointing to other cases in which she said that breaches of Liberian statutes had formed the 
basis for a claim of this type. She noted (fairly in my assessment) the change between 
Professor Banks’ view on this issue between his first  and second reports.  
E3(5)  The Experts’ Joint Memorandum  on the 2007 Act  
141. The Joint Memorandum suggested that the experts were agreed as to what had to be proved 
to establish a breach of s.76 of the 2007 Act,  on the basis that the Act was clear. As to s.80:  
i) Professor Banks and Counsellor Padmore said that it gave a claim against the person 
who “engaged in, directed, authorized, consented to or participated in the act or 
omission”, but not against a person who agreed to commit the offence, but accepted 
that “ such a person may be liable for engaging in, directing, authorizing, consenting 
to or participating ” in the offence.  
ii) Professor Banks and Counsellor Padmore expressed the view that there could only be 
liability under s.80 “where said defendant has directed,  authorized, consented to, 
ratified, acquiesced in, or participated in the act, and that if those factors are not 
present, a defendant will not be held liable” (a view which accords with their opinion 
as to the limits of vicarious liability generally under  Liberian law).  
iii) Counsellor  Padmore  suggested that there could be no liability at common law for the 
offence  and Professor Banks that s.76 could not provide the basis for an action for 
damages for wrong.  
iv) Counsellor Musu -Scott did not agree  that s.80 preclud ed a common law claim based 
on a breach of 76, and  said that s.80 was not exhaustive.  
E3(6)  The Evidence at Trial 
142. As I have explained, Professor Banks  did not give evidence at trial. The 2007 Act received 
very little attention in cross -examination. Counsellor Musu -Scott was not asked about it. It 
was suggested to Counsellor Padmore that s.80 did not address liability on the basis of 
agreement (which he accepted) and that this showed s.80 was not an exhaustive code. In 
response to that last suggestion,  he replied:  
“Section 80. I don’t think that the entire issue relates to the Telecommunications Act. 
That is (inaudible) my point. The Telecommunications Ac t is a Liberian statute that 
says, here is the law in Liberia, and that is it”.  
While that does not appear to be an answer to the question asked, Mr Singla KC was 
evidently happy with it, because he responded “exactly”.  
143. I have been left with the distinct i mpression that both Lonestar and Orange Liberia were 
keen to say as little as possible about  s.80. While I entirely understand Mr Kitchener KC’s 
forensic reluctance, both because s.80 has not been pleaded and because  it does  not appear 
helpful to this part of his case, I found the reasons for Mr Singla KC’s reluctance  more 
difficult to discern. However, judges see only a very small part of the forensic landscape

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
40 
 which the parties’ legal representatives must survey  in full , and then plot how to navigate. 
The end result is:  
i) No claim is being advanced under s.80.  
ii) The existence of s.80 is being relied upon by Orange Liberia as a reason why there 
should be no liability on any other basis under Liberian law.  
iii) The argument at (ii) is disputed.  
iv) That dispute  was not explored at trial.  
144. I should record, however, that the position in which I find myself is, from the peculiarly 
personal perspective of the judgment writer, a n uncomfortable and artificial one, in which 
there are debates as to whether particular forms of  claim can be advanced against the 
background of s.80  and/or as to whether any requirement of direct actionability, if there is 
one, is met , without any exploration of that key provision.  
E4 The Action o f Damages for Wrong under Liberian Law 
E4(1)  The Historical Position  
145. The earl y Liberian legal source s provided to me referr ing to an action of damages for wrong 
were the Constitution and Laws of Maryland in Liberia (1837), published by the Maryland 
State Colonization Soc iety, and “the Statute Laws of the Republic of Liberia, Carefully 
Compiled from the Laws of the Commonwealth with the Declaration of Independence” 
published “by Authority” in Monrovia in 1856. I am told that this last book is referred to 
by Liberian lawyer s as the “Old Blue Book”. Title II (“Of Remedies”) , Chapter 1 (“Of 
Actions”)  of both works are to the following effect : 
i) Section 3 divides actions into thre e classes: breach of contract, action s which “grow 
out of a wrong” and causes of action which “grow out of a judgment ”. 
ii) Sections 11 to 14 provide:  
“There are three actions growing out of wrongs – replevin – ejectment – and 
the action to recover damages for a wrong.  
Replevin is an action to re cover the possession of movable property wrongfully 
withheld by the defendant from the plaintiff.  
Ejectment is an action to recover possession of real or immovable property, 
wrongfully withheld by the defendant from the plaintiff. A widow may recover 
her d ower in ejectment.  
The action to recover damages for wrong is an action in which the plaintiff 
seeks to obtain from the defendant, a sum of money, or damages or 
compensation for the injury he has sustained,  by reason of some act of the 
defendant. It may br iefly be called an action of damages. It is the action which

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
41 
 lies for every injury, for which there is no other remedy”.  
146. There is much here to ignite the interests of the legal historian, and no doubt to dull the 
senses of those fortunate enough to spend t heir salad days studying more  glamorous  fare. 
Professor David Ibbetson noted that these works appeared to have adopted the broad 
structure of the law of civil procedure in Maryland as detailed in Treatise on the Course of 
Proceedings  in the Common Law Cour ts of the State of Maryland  (1839).  Chapter II (“of 
the Remedies used in Maryland”) , 45-6 observes that there are five causes of action for 
wrongs in Maryland – replevin, ejectment, dower “and the remaining two, case, and 
trespass”. Trespass lay for direct  interference with the person or with real or personal 
property (or the possession thereof), and case “whenever actual force is impossible”.   
147. This division is consistent with t he distinction which emerged in English (and was 
transplanted to American ) tort law between trespass (which had at its core the idea of 
forcible wrongdoing  or invasive interferences with the claimant or their property ) and 
trespass on the case (which did not , and as a result “had an almost unlimited potential to 
expand into other area s”: David Ibbetson, A Historical Introduction to the Law of 
Obligations , 56: Ibbetson ). However, as further transplanted into Liberia, the action of 
damages for wrong appears to have subsumed both trespass and case into a single broad 
category of tortious claims.  
148. So far as the development of English tort law is concerned (and at the risk of it being 
suggested by Professor Ibbetson – not for the first time – that I have overly simplified a set 
of complex historical developments), the position appear s to be as follows:  
i) The availability of the action on the case led the effective range of the law of torts to 
be considerably expanded in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.  
ii) By the start of the seventeenth century the law of torts had come to assume thr ee 
aspects ( Ibbetson , 96):  
“First was the core, centred on the general action of trespass, but extending into 
trespass  on the case , dealing with invasive interferences. Second was a group 
of tolerably well -bounded ‘nominate’ torts, of which nuisance, conve rsion, and 
defamation were the most obvious examples. Finally, there was a miscellaneous 
ragbag of situations in which plaintiffs had succeeded in convincing the courts 
that they had suffered loss for which they ought to be compensated – an open -
ended set of ‘torticles’ as one modern commentator has dubbed them”.  
iii) In the eighteenth century, and into the nineteenth century, there was “a wholesale 
shift of litigation from trespass to case” ( Ibbetson , 153), but case remained 
“subdivided into a number of nominat e forms and a large residuary group linked 
together by nothing stronger than the defendant was alleged to have caused loss to 
the plaintiff” ( Ibbetson , 169).  
iv) During the nineteenth century, a substantial part of the residuary group had 
“coalesced as the tort of negligence” (ibid), outside of which a series of individual 
torts crystallised, generally classified by reference to the interests of the claimant 
which had been infringed, each with their ow n rules ( Ibbetson , 184).

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
42 
 v) The first tort treatise publish ed in either England and Wales or the U.S. was published 
in Boston in 1859. In the 1866 edition of that book, Francis Hilliard’s The Law of 
Torts , the author complained of the prevailing tendency to treat the law of wrongs as 
a “system of forms rather than  principles” (preface, vi).  
vi) By the end of the twentieth century, the tort of negligence had come to dominate the 
field, although there remained “a myriad of ‘torticles’, ranging from interference with 
dead bodies and racial discrimination to harassment and  deceit, each with its own 
particular rules” ( Ibbetson , 201).  
149. As I have indicated, from the creation of the Republic, Liberian tort law reflected the 
development at [ 148(iii)] trespass having been assumed within what became the even larger 
residuary catego ry of case (the action of damages for wrong). The issue between the experts 
is whether, as it now falls to be applied:  
i) Liberian tort law has developed to the state in [ 148(vi) ], such that it is necessary for 
Lonestar to bring itself within a recognised or nominate tort, with its own particular 
rules; or  
ii) “the action of damages for wrong” continues to provide a vehicle to bring claims  
within the “ragbag” or “open -ended set of ‘torticles’ ” referred to in [148(ii)]  where 
the defendant is alleged to have caused loss to the claimant for which the claimant 
ought to be compensated , outside of those established categories . 
E4(2)  The Current Position Under Liberian Law 
150. It is Counsellor Musu -Scott’s opinion that there remains a claim of “action of damages for 
wrong” under Liberian law which does not require the claimant to satisfy the “particular 
rules ” of causes of action such as negligence, nuisance, conversion etc.  Her evidence is:  
“As a matter of Liberian law, the action of damages for wrong is a well -known, 
common law -based cause of action for non -contractual wrongs … [A]n action of 
damages for wrong requires proof of two elements: wrongful conduct by a defendant, 
which results in injury or loss. No particular criteria are prescribed in the case law of 
the Liberian Supreme Court in relation to whether conduct is, or is not,  ‘wrongful’ 
(and for the avoidance of doubt, it is not necessary for the  relevant wrongful conduc t 
to be in breach of a statute ). Instead, when determining whether conduct qualifies as 
‘wrongful ’, the Liberian courts will … generally take a broad and fact -sensitive 
approach”.  
On this account, the action would indeed embrace “a miscellaneous ragbag of situations  in 
which plaintiffs had succeeded in convincing the courts that they had suffered loss for 
which they ought to be compensated”.  
151. Counsellor P admore, by contrast, says that from its inception, the action of damages for 
wrong was simply a form of a ction, and it was necessary for the claimant to plead one of a 
number of recognised causes of action. He refers to a specimen wording  in an appendix to 
the Old Blue Book , giving a “form of a complaint” for an action against someone who had 
come onto the cl aimant’s land and cut down and carried away ten trees.  Title II , Chapter

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
43 
 IV of the Old Blue Book – “Of the Complaint” – does prescribe certain matters which a 
complaint must include in their pleading, including that “the complaint in an action of 
damages s hall state the injury complained of, and the fact that the plaintiff has sustained 
damages thereby”. It also specifies certain requirements for complaints of damages to real 
property, personal property, personal injury or domestic relations. However, it sa ys nothing 
about these being exhaustive and a chapter dealing with the contents of a complaint (where 
reference to the appendix first appears) would not be an obvious place to look for an 
exhaustive definition of the types of tort claim which can be brough t. The Appendix itself 
says:  
“The preceding forms of complaints are only models or specimens and may be 
changed or modified, or new ones invented on similar principles, to be used in cases 
not herein provided for.”  
152. Further, the existence of a residuary cat egory for tort claims in Liberia in the form of the 
action of damages for wrong is supported by s.165(c) of the Civil Procedure Law 1956, 
describing “[a]ctions to recover damages for wrong” as “an action which lies for every 
injury for which there is no ot her remedy”  (and the Joint Memorandum quotes a similar 
statement by the Supreme Court of Liberia in King v Williams  (1916) 2 LLLR 219, 221).  
153. On that basis alone, therefore, I have concluded that Counsellor  Padmore’s evidence that 
Liberian law only ever recognised specific torts dealing with a delineated set of wrongful 
acts is  not correct . Having reached that conclusion on the basis of the cited terms of the Old 
Blue Book  (the only sourc e Counsellor  Padmore  relied upon), I would simply note the 
entirely general terms of other sections of the Old Blue Book which were not put in 
evidence, in Book I, “Of Legal Principles and Rules” , which are wholly inconsistent with 
there being an (unidentified and) exhaustive  list of individual torts at that sta ge in Liberia’s 
legal history : 
i) §1: “An injury is an unlawful damage done to another and is the proper subject of 
action”.  
ii) §2: “Every act which is prejudicial to the interest of another is an injury, unless it be 
warrant ed by some law …” . 
iii) §5: “Every person is liable to an action for all damages which arise from the 
negligence, carelessness or unskilfulness of himself or his wife at any time, of his 
agents or servants while employed in his business”.  
iv) §6: “Every man is boun d to use his own property so as not to damage his neighbour. 
If any person makes use of his own property in a manner prejudicial to his neighbour’s 
interest, it is an injury”.  
v) §55: “All the provisions of this title are to be considered as annexed to, incor porated 
in, and controlling all the provisions of the second title [viz, “Of Remedies” ] except 
those contained in the twenty -third chapter” [viz “Of the Writ of Habeas Corpus”].  
154. Those passages are in very similar terms to a document which was in evidence, an “Abs tract 
of Legal Principles and Rules” dated January 1 841 which describes the principles for

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
44 
 liability for wrong in similarly general terms  (Title I sections 1 to 6 and 54).  
155. Counsellor Padmore  was on surer ground when noting that claimants were freque ntly non -
suited if they had pursued their claim using the wrong form of action. One of the cases he 
referred to, Cavalla River Com pany v ES Prince Pepple  [1934] LRSC 5, involved a case in 
which the form of action - “action of damages to personal property” - had wrongly been 
used to bring a claim for breach of contract to recover  an amount o f money deposited with 
the defendant and repayable on demand.  The claim was dismissed for that reason . 
156. Difficulties of that kind were addressed by section 1.3 of the Liberian Civil Procedure Act 
1972  (the 1972 Act) which  provided as follows:  
“1.1.  Application of Civil Procedure Law.  
The Civil Procedure Law shall govern the procedure in all civil actions and special 
proceedings before all judges and in all courts in the judicial branch of the 
Government, except where the procedure is regulated by inconsistent statutes or rules 
adopted in conformity therewith. Acts required by provisions of this tit le to be done 
by clerks of court may be done by a justice of the peace or stipendiary magistrate in 
applying those provisions to courts not of record . 
1.2. Actions and special proceedings.  
1. Prosecution as action. Any independent application to a court f or relief shall be 
prosecuted in the form of an action, except where prosecution in the form of a special 
proceeding is authorized. Except where otherwise required by statute or rule of court, 
procedure in special proceedings shall be the same as in action s.  
… 
1.3. One form of civil action.  
There is only one form of civil action. The distinction between actions at law and 
suits in equity, and the form of those actions and suits heretofore existing, are 
abolished.”  
157. I accept that the 1972 Act made significa nt changes to the procedural law of Liberia, and 
reduced the risk of a complainant with a good claim finding that claim dismissed because 
of the particular document used to assert  it. In Kamara v Wolloh [1981] LRSC 15, for 
example, an attempt to dismiss a claim because it had been issued as summary proceedings , 
when it was not , failed because of the 1972 Act . However, the suggestion that the 1972 Act 
amended the substantive tort law of Liberia, such that the principles which determined wh at 
matters could be  the subject o f a claim in tort were changed, is a much more challenging 
assertion. Counsellor Padmore’s opinion was as follows:  
“In the place of the historical practice of pleading causes of action within the 
constraints of the various forms of action, th e modern practice is to plead individual 
causes of action (e.g. negligence, libel, etc) using the ‘one form of civil action’ that 
became applicable in Liberia after 1972. The new procedure is confirmed, for

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
45 
 example, in the sample pleadings in Appendix 1 to  the Liberian Civil Procedure Law 
1972, which include sample pleadings in an ‘action for breach of contract’ (Form 3), 
negligence (Form 8), an ‘action for damages for assault and battery …  
Liberian law has thus never recognized a cause of action  called the  ‘action for 
damages for wrong’. It was historically a form of action which a plaintiff could use 
to bring causes of action recognized by Liberian law, but it was abolished in or before 
1972. Although parties’ pleadings and decided cases after 19 72 often c ontinue to refer 
to the old ‘action for damages for wrong’ , this is anachroni stic and a hold over from 
past practice. As I have said, it would not even be correct as a matter of historical 
practice prior to 1972 to refer to the ‘action for damages for wrongs’ as a cause of 
action recognized by Liberian law because it never has been.”  
158. On this issue  of the effect of the 1972 Act , I prefer the evidence of Counsellor Musu -Scott 
for the following reasons.  
159. First, as I have stated, the suggestion that there was a closed category of tort causes of action 
before 1972 is not supported by the passages in the Old Blue Book on which Counsellor 
Padmore relied,  nor its 1837 predecessor,  nor did he point to any other source from which 
I could identify what that closed category comprised . 
160. Second, the 1972 Act was a procedural reform, but I have seen nothing to suggest t hat it 
limited the factual circumstances in which a tortious remedy would be available for loss 
caused by unlawful conduct. When I asked Counsellor Padmore whether, following the 
passing of the 1972 Act, there was any conduct which would previously have be en 
actionable in tort which ceased to be so, he answered (very fairly) “that is a very good 
question … I’m afraid I can’t answer it right now”, although he did accept my suggestion 
that “ it would be quite an odd thing for a procedural statute to do.” It is  very difficult to see 
how the 1972 Act changed what sets of facts could be the subject of a claim in tort, as 
opposed to the means by which such a claim might be pursued. The 1972 Act does not 
purport to address anything other than matters of procedure  (including, for that purpose, 
limitation which has a hybrid substantive and procedural character).  
161. Nor did the specimen pleadings at the end of the 1972 Act have that effect (any more than 
their pr edecessors in the appendix to the Old Blue Book ). Section 9. 3, addressing “Form of 
pleadings”, provides that “pleading forms , contained in the appendix of forms , are sufficient 
under the requirements of this title and are illustrative of the degree of particularity 
required.”  
162. Third, I found the reaction of Professor  Banks – a former Associate Justice of the Supreme 
Court of Liberia – to this suggestion striking. He said that “an examination of cases decided 
by the Supreme Court clearly demonstrates overwhelmingly the existence in the Liberian 
jurisdiction of a cause of action denominated ‘action of damages for wrong’” . He denied 
that this was simply a form of pleading, suggesting that Counsellor Padmore’s view “would 
bring into question the legitimacy or legality of all of the cases of action of damages for 
wrong”. I am unable to accept Orange Liberia’s view that the difference between 
Counsellor Padmore and Professor Banks on this issue was essentially terminological. It is 
clear that Professor Banks saw the action of damages for wrong as specific to Liberia, and

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
46 
 a distinct feature of the Liberian legal landscape in contrast to the position in England and 
Wales and the U.S. A. 
163. Finally,  the way in which Liberian courts have continued to reason  in the cases to which I 
have been referred is inconsistent with Counsellor Pad more’s analysis. F.W. Maitland ’s 
famous observation that  “the forms of action we have buried, but the y still rule us from t he 
grave”  (The Forms of Action at Common Law  (1909),  1) has proved particularly true in 
Liberia. While it is  possible to analyse the facts of m any of these cases, and show that they 
include averments which would meet the requirements of particular torts, that is no t how 
they are reasoned:  
i) In NPA v Dougbah [2016] LRSC 22, the court’s analysis proceeded as follows: 
“wherefore it is our opinion that the appellant’s conduct in removing the subject 
container from the premises resulting to the loss of its contents was wrongful; that 
said wrongful conduct injured the shippers of the containers as they were 
dispossessed of their belongings; and for such wrong damages would lie as a matter 
of law”. No reference was made to any nominate tort such as conversion or detinue.  
ii) In Firestone Liberia Inc v G Galimah Kollie [2012] LRSC 14, the claimant brough t 
an action for damages for wrong premised on the wrongful seizure and detention of 
their truck. The case contains no reference to conversion, trespass to goods or detinue. 
Rather the court held that, while Firestone Liberi a Inc had been granted extensive 
police powers and authorities under an Amended and Restated Concession 
Agreement with the Republic of Liberia  (which had been given effect by legislation) , 
by that same Agreement, Firestone had agreed to subscribe to and ad here to the 
principles contained in  the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights. It 
was found that Firestone had violated those principles and breached the Liberian 
constitution through the duration of the seizure , their own use of the truck duri ng the 
period of its detention  and their failure to comply with the Concession Agreement . In 
short, the wrongful act was breach of a statute (as Counsellor  Padmore 
acknowledged), but there was no analysis of whether the statute gave a statutory cause 
of ac tion to the claimant  (who was not, after all, a party to the Concession 
Agreement) . 
iii) Total (Liberia) Inc v Stoner (Liberia) Inc 26 August 2021 involved t he allegation that 
a contract to  hire the claimant’s  trucks had wrongfully been suspended on the basis 
of a third -party ’s allegation of non -delivery of fuel , without a proper investigation. 
The principal issue for the court was whether it was open to the defendant to rely on 
a recently discovered arbitration agreement to object to the court’s jurisdiction. 
However, t here was no suggestion that the claimant’s claim did not constitute a tort 
known to Liberian law . The trial judge upheld the claimant’s claim because “the 
termination of the services to the plaintiff was not justified and that same was done 
merely  to injure and expose the plaintiff to serious hardship and mental anguish. In 
the mind of this court, an Action for Damages for Wrong will be justified”. None of 
the 29 errors alleged in the defendant’s bill of exception said that bad faith suspension 
of a contract  was not a recognised tort . The Supreme Court noted that “the review of 
the records reveals that the trial judge principally held the appellant liable for damages 
for wrong on the theory that the suspension and later termination of the appellant was

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
47 
 unjustified, in the absence of due process …. [and] where the alleged neglect to 
deliver … was unsubstantiated by evidence.” There was no suggestion that this was 
not a sufficient basis for liability. On the contrary, the Supreme Court found that the 
suspension was wrongful, and stated “the law ext ant is that the plaintiff in action for 
damages for wrong must not only plead the wrong complained of, but that the plaintiff 
must prove by the preponderance of the evidence that he suffered loss or injury as a 
result of the defendant’s wrongful act”.  
iv) City Builders v Purported City Builders 15 July 2013. The claimant brought what was 
described as a “sixteen -count complaint in an action of damages for wrong” against 
the defendant who had registered a business in the same name  as the claimant’s , “in 
flagrant violation of our Association Law which prohibits two corporations from 
operating under the same name”. The trial judge dismissed the claim, on the basis that 
the claimant had no trademark in its nam e. The Supreme Court identified the sole 
issue as “whether or not the acts of the defendants/appellees constitute a wrong for 
which … damages will lie”. They answered that question in the most general terms: 
“we hold that it was wrong … to have filed artic les of incorporation carrying the name 
City Builders Inc, because the said name had previously been assigned to the 
plaintiff/appellant”. It was pointed out that the statute required those seeking to 
incorporate a business to ensure that they did not use t he same name as another 
business, but there was no consideration of whether the statute created a statutory 
duty or gave a cause of action to the existing business.  While Orange Liberia 
suggested in closing that “City Builders may … be best understood as a  negligence 
case or as a case in the tort of passing off”, neither the case itself, nor Counsellor  
Padmore when asked about it, offers either rationale.  
v) 50-50 Incorporated v Ecobank Liberia Ltd , 8 Septem ber 2017, in which the claim 
(which failed on the fac ts, but was not challenged on the law) was that a bank who 
had identified the claimant as a defaulting debtor in a return sent to the Central Bank 
of Liberia had acted wrongfully in failing to correct that submission once the debt 
was paid , in breach of the Central Bank of Liberia “Regulation Guidelines for 
Management of the Credit Reference System”.  
164. Having concluded that the current state of Liberia n law does not comprise an exhaustive  
list of nominate or specific torts of the kind now recognised in US and  English law, but that 
it retains, through the action of damages for wrong, scope for some kinds of residual claims 
outside of those categories , the question which then arises is whether the wrongs relied 
upon here – breaches of the UK statute and the 2007  Act – satisfy the requirement of a 
“wrongful act” for this purpose . I remain unclear as to the type of act or omission which 
can constitute a wrong for th e purpose  of the action of damages for wrong, perhaps because 
there is no definition, simply a series  of case -by-case responses . Counsellor Musu -Scott 
said that “no particular criteria are prescribed in the case law of the Liberian Supreme 
Court” and the courts “generally take a broad and fact -sensitive approach”. Professor 
Banks, who shared Counsellor Mu su-Scott’s analysis that an action of damages for wrong 
survived as a substantive claim under Liberian law, suggested that what was required was 
“the commission of an act (whether intentional or unintentional, the outcome of criminal or 
civil act, in contr act or in tort, negligence or otherwise) which has violated the claimant’s 
right”.

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
48 
 165. I am not persuaded that the category of wrongful act is anything like as broad or open -
ended as Counsellor Musu -Scott suggests. However,  it is clear from the City Builders and 
Kollie cases that, in principle  at least , breach of a duty imposed by a Liberian statute , or the 
interference with an interest legally protected by a statute , can provide the necessary 
wrongful act for the purposes of an action of damages for wrong . In this case, I am satisfied 
that, subject to the issue of whether s.80 of the 2007 Act precludes an alternative remedy, 
wrongful interference with  Lonestar’s telecommunications network in breach of s.76 of the 
2007 Act is sufficient.  The clear terms of s. 76 both identify a telecommunications network 
as a legally protected interest, and render unjustified interference with such a network 
unlawful. Indeed,  Professor Banks’ first report accepted this in terms:  
“The Telecommunications Act 2007 does not lay out  a special procedure. However,  
in respect of damages suffered by a party on account of the violations, the court would 
deem the violations to be a wrong committed against the victim, and as such would 
allow the victim to bring an action of damages for wron g or to even characterize the 
action as simply one of damages  … 
Where the unlawful or wrongful act results in injury or damage to a third party … the 
Liberian courts could consider the act not only a violation of the statute but also a 
wrongful act perpetrated against the third party ...  
The conduct complained of may be one in violation of a statute with resulting damage 
to the complainant …. All of these are deemed and treated as wrongful, and hence the 
Liberian court’s acceptance of the action of d amages for wrong …  
I am of the opinion, and as has been the practice in civil actions which have grown 
out of a statutory prohibition, a party may rely on the common law concept of 
damages for wrong or simply action of damages which is recognized under Lib erian 
law. Under Liberian law, the Liberian courts would not treat or characterize the action 
as a breach of a statutory duty. Such characterization would only be given to the action 
if the Liberia Telecommunications Authority was  the complainant and was s eeking 
to hold the violator accountable for the violation of the statutory duty or to ensure 
compliance with the Act ”. 
166. These passages appeared in a report produced when Lonestar was only advancing claims 
under the English law torts of lawful and unlawful m eans conspiracy, and unlawful 
interference, their purpose being to show that, while Liberian law had a substantive claim 
(the action of damages for wrong) with elements of these English torts, the torts themselves 
were not and would not be recognised as pa rt of Liberian law. It is right to acknowledge 
that in his subsequent reports, and his contribution to the Joint Memorandum, all produced 
after Lonestar had advanced a claim in reliance on the action of damages for wrong, 
Professor Banks provides a n appare ntly different opinion:  
“Because the Liberia Telecommunications Act 2007 is a statute and does not fall 
within or has not been declared, either by the statute or by the courts, as constituting 
or to be an ‘action of damages for wrong’ but has its own cause  of action (criminal 
and civil) it cannot be deemed to constitute  an action of damages for wrong’.

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
49 
 Where a complainant claims that a common law tort was committed against it and 
relies on the breach of a statute which vests in a complainant a right to civi l action, 
but is restrictive as to elements which must be present for the complainant to claim 
damages against the defendant, liability will not attach if any one or more of the 
elements or conditions stated in Section 80 of the Telecommunications Act 2007  is 
not present. ” 
167. I deal with the specific issue about the position when an action of damages for wrong would 
be inconsistent with s.80 below. If Professor Banks was seeking to raise a wider issue in 
his second and subsequent reports, he  neither acknowledg ed the change  from his first 
report , nor offer ed any explanation for i t, and the resultant position would  be very difficult 
to reconcile with his general description of the action of damages for wrong in his first 
report, which he apparently stands by. I a m satisfied that this is one of those many occasions 
when first thoughts were best thoughts , the opinion in the first report being particularly 
valuable because it was given at a time when the point had yet to crystallise as a dispute in 
the litigation . 
168. By contrast, I was not persuaded on the evidence that breach of the (UK) Computer Misuse 
Act 1990 would suffice. Liberia has passed its own legislation addressing the “mischief” 
which the DDOS Attacks constituted. If, for any reason, the 2007 Act was not cap able of 
supplying the wrongful act necessary for an action of damages for wrong, then I am not 
persuaded Liberia would look to legislation from a foreign legislature to fill this gap.  In this 
regard, I found Counsellor P admore’s evidence persuasive:  
“Liber ia is very jealous, perhaps like every - maybe not every, but certainly that one 
poor country, that has now existed for about 200 years in a sea of colonial [colonis ed] 
by very large and powerful European countries. Liberia has been very jealous to guard 
its sovereignty. It is a poor country and it is very proud of that sovereignty. I find it 
very difficult to think that Liberian courts would ever, under any circumstances, 
incorporate a foreign statute as a basis for liability in Liberia.”  
E4(3)  The Elephant in the Room  
169. That leaves over, however, the issue of whether the existence of s.80 precludes a claim for 
an action of damages for wrong based on an unlawful act constituted by a breach  of s.76 of 
the 2007 Act.  
170. I have little difficulty acceptin g, as a matter of principle, that if the Liberian legislature had 
stipulated certain limits on the right of civil recovery premise d on a breach of a particular 
legislative obligation , then it is highly unlikely that a Liberian court would permit an action 
of damages  in wider terms in respect of that same breach. However, leaving aside the issue 
of vicarious liability to which I will return, it remains wholly unclear to me why it is 
suggested that there would be any conflict between the 2007 Act and the acti on of damages 
for wrong in this case. I was left with the distinct impression that the issue of conflict with 
s.80 was a theoretical rather than practical obstacle  to Lonestar’s claim . 
171. The wording of the statute is particularly wide , providing for the civi l liability of “any 
person who engaged in, directed, authorized, consented to or participated in” the relevant

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
50 
 acts. The experts identified no special rule  of construction of the 2007 Act, beyond the clear 
effect of the language used.  
172. Counsellor Padmore ex pressed the view that “Section 80 does not include civil liability on 
the basis of an agreement to commit an offence”, but was always careful to qualify that 
language by stating “such a person” (viz someone who has entered into an agreement) “may 
be liable  for engaging in, directing, authorizing, consenting  to or participating in an 
offence”. Lonestar’s pleaded case  (which , as I explain below,  is substantiated on the facts ) 
is that Mr Marziano commissioned Mr Kaye to carry out the attacks, paid him to do so , that 
Mr Marziano, Mr Polani and Mr Kaye planned and implemented them together and that Mr 
Marziano and Mr Polani provided reports on their effectiveness. There is simply no real 
world in which that conduct would fall outside the broad scope of s.80.  
173. Nor is there anything to suggest that the “manner of enforcement” of s.76, from a civil 
perspective, would differ as between an action brought under s.80 and an action of damages 
for wrong. Indeed s.80 expressly refers to any claim under it being “subject to t he practices 
and procedures of the applicable court in such matters”, and, as I have noted, Professor 
Banks’ initial and unvarnished view was that this could involve an action of damages for 
wrong.  
174. In the absence of such a conflict  being established , I am not persuaded that the existence of 
s.80 precludes an action of damages for wrong premised on a breach of s.76 of the 2007 
Act. Both Counsellor Musu -Scott and Professor Banks (in his first report) were of the view 
that it did not.  Indeed,  it is not clear t hat Counsellor Padmore was saying anything more 
than that there could be no action of damages for wrong based on a pure agreement to 
commit the s.76 offence, and noth ing more, because s.80 did not provide for liability on 
this basis . But that is not this c ase. 
E5 The English Torts of Lawful and  Unlawful Means Conspiracy and Unlawful 
Interference  
175. I was not persuaded that the Liberian courts would have adopted  any of  these three English 
torts under the Reception Statute. As I have indicated, to the extent that the Liberian courts 
do look to other common law jurisdictions, I am satisfied that it has become the 
overwhelming practice for them to look to U .S. rather than English jurisprudence. If there 
was no Liberian law to such effect, I was not persuaded that the Liberian courts would have 
been willing to  embrace a tort of lawful means conspiracy (a distinct oddity in the modern 
world), or torts which gave cause s of act ion for unlawful acts to those who did not acquire 
their own cause of action against the primary wrongdoer  in respect of that unlawful act.  
176. In any event, had it been necessary to reach this stage of the analysis, it would have followed 
that although Liberi a had passed  legislation specifically criminalising conduct of th e type 
in issue in th ese proceedings  through the 2007 Act, that conduct was only civilly actionable 
under s.80 (as to which no claim is pleaded) or in circumstances which were not satisfied 
in this case . To my mind, it is simply not realistic to imagine that the Liberian courts would 
“receive” a new common law tort or torts from other jurisdictions, simply for the purpose 
of providing a wider scope  of civil liability for breach of the 2007 Act  than the Liberian 
legislature had seen fit to provide.

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
51 
 E6 Vicarious Liability under Liberian Law 
177. The second principal  dispute in relation to Liberian law concerned the circumstances in 
which an employer or principal could be vicariously liable for the act s of a servant or agent, 
a question which raised a number of sub -issues:  
i) Can an employer/ principal  be held vicariously liable for intentional wrongdoing by 
an employee/agent?  
ii) Can an employer/ principal  be held civilly liable for a breach of s.7 6 of the 2007 Act 
committed by an employee/agent?  
iii) What test determines whether someone is an employee for the purposes of vicarious 
liability?  
iv) In what circumstances (if any) can wrongful conduct by a natural person be attributed 
to a company?  
E6(1)  Can an Employer/ Principal  be Held Vicariously Liable for Intentional Wrongdoing by 
an Employee/ Agent?  
178. The suggestion that, as a matter of Liberian law, an employer or principal cannot be 
vicariously liable f or intentional acts of wrongdoing by their servants or agents was traced 
by Counsellor Padmore to Woodin & Company  v Gibson  [1923]  LRSC 1. The case involved 
an allegedly slanderous statement made by Cooper (who was alleged to be acting as 
Woodin’s agent) to the effect that Gibson (a postmaster ) had been supressing the 
defendant’s letters in his official capacity, and an allegedly libellous statement made about 
Gibson on a subsequent occasion to the Postmaster General of the Republic of Liberia. In 
response to the slander claim, Woodin  alleged that there was no claim “as the alleged false, 
scandalous and defamatory words were spoken … outside of [Cooper’s]  authority and 
capacity as agent aforesaid, and can not legally be traced to the defendant, he was not ac ting 
at that particular time in the capacity of agent for the defendant”.  
179. In addressing the slander claim, the Court held:  
“Generally a principal is not liable for the wilful acts or misdeeds of his agent 
whereby damage is done to another unless he origina lly commanded, or subsequently 
assented to, the act. He is liable to third persons for the misfeasance or negligence of 
the agent, in the course of the agency; but the responsibility of the principal is limited 
to cases properly in the scope of the agency.  (Story on Agency, 454.) The record 
clearly shows that the conversation during which Mathew Joseph Cooper, the 
defendants' former agent, is alleged to have uttered the libellous words set out in 
plaintiff's complaint, took place at the post office in Harpe r, but there was nothing to 
show whether the letters referred to were the letters of the said Mathew Joseph Cooper 
or those of his principal W. D. Woodin & Co., the defendant in this case. In any case 
it does not clearly appear that the said Mathew Joseph Cooper was acting in the scope 
of his agency at the time. To make a corporation or company responsible for every 
unauthorized act of its agent would work incalculable harm.”

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
52 
 180. There are a number of noteworthy features of this passage : 
i) Slander is not, general ly, a tort which depends on the speaker having any particular 
intention, and thus not a tort  which requires a “wilful act or misdeed”.  Nor was the 
jury apparently asked to make any finding as to Cooper’s state of mind when making 
the allegedly slanderous s tatements.  In these circumstances, it is not clear how the 
factual premise for a rule of law dealing with vicarious liability for acts of intentional 
wrongdoing arose.  
ii) The initial sentence expresses a “general” rather than universal rule, and  the passage  
moves very quickly in the next sentence to a discussion of scope of agency, 
suggesting that the first sentence may do no more than reflect an assumption that 
generally, intentional wrongdoing will not fall within the scope of the agency.  
iii) The court found tha t there was no evidence to show that Cooper was speaking about 
his employer’s  letters or acting within the scope of his agency.  
iv) It is common ground that the reference given to Story is in error. Para. 454 of the 1882 
(and last) edition deals with liability for the conduct of sub -agents.  Paragraphs 452 
and 453  make it clear that a principal can sometimes be held liable in a criminal suit, 
and to a third party for “frauds, deceits, concealments and … other malfeasances, or 
misfeasances, an d omissions of his agent, in the course of  his employment, although 
the principal did not authorize, or justify, or participate .” Indeed,  it was noted that “in 
no other way could there be any safety to third persons in their dealing  ... indirectly 
with [th e principal] through the instrumentality of the agent”, the principal warranting 
the agent’s “fidelity and good conduct in all matters within the scope of the agency”. 
Examples of circumstances when the principal would be liable included selling false 
jewe ls or “fraudulently deceiving a third person, in the matter of his agency”.  
181. Woodin , therefore, is at best a rather uncertain foundation for a principle that there is no 
vicarious liability for acts of intentional wrongdoing under Liberian law. Orange Liber ia 
also relies on the decision in Harris v Cavalla Rubber [2013] LRSC 9. That was another 
case of slander , the defendant’s security agents having stopped the claimant and accused 
him of stealing the defendant’s rubber. The Supreme Court cited Woodin , stati ng “it is 
generally held that the principal is not customarily held liable for the wilful acts of his agent 
which conduct results to the injury of another”, but said that the case before the m “presented 
an exception” because the agent’s act had subsequentl y been assented to.  It is right, 
therefore, that the Supreme Court accepted the existence of a general rule to the effect 
contended for by Orange Liberia, without re -visiting the issue, albeit that they did not need 
to because the case would not have falle n foul of such a rule.  
182. However, there are a number of cases in which awards of compensatory damages have been 
made against companies in respect of intentional tortious conduct by their employees – for 
example Fires tone v Kollie [2012] LRSC 14 , In Re Honour able Prince Quaye Toe [1999] 
LRSC 45  and Inter -Con Security System Inc v Bartuah 6 July 2001 (all involving physical 
assaults). Given Orange Liberia’s reference to Woodin as a decision which has “stood for 
more than one hundred years”, it is important to n ote that it does not appear to have cast a 
particularly long shadow  in the Liberian courts .

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
53 
 183. There were two further cases to which I was referred.  
184. The first was In Re: Grievance and Ethics Committee Investigation Report on Complaint 
by Mr Augustin T Iriekpe n against Counsellor Samuel Pearso n 8 February 2021. The case 
involved professional misconduct proceedings against the lawyer for the Monrovia City 
Corporation. The claimant said that three of his vehicles had been towed away by the 
corporation’s contractor  (of which the defendant was also a director) . When he contacted 
the corporation’s lawyer to a sk for their return,  the defendant demanded as condition of 
ordering their release that two cars  be given to him  personally. The defendant sold one car, 
gave another away as a graduation gift, and used the third himself. When reported to his 
professional b ody, the defendant took the point that he had been acting as the corporation’s 
agent and suggested that they were the proper defendant. Not surprisingly, the committee 
had no truck with that answer  (and it is impossible to see how this could have relieved the 
defendant of personal liability on the facts of the case). The committee said the defendant’s 
actions did not “fall within the scope of authority of a lawyer for which he should be 
shiel ded by the  Mon rovia City Council”. The link between the defendant’ s conduct, and 
his role as the corporation’s legal adviser, was tenuous indeed. The decision appears to rest 
on the finding of the scope of the defendant’s authority, rather than any principle of law.  
185. The second, and more important, case is Guaranty Trust Bank v Freeman  23 September 
2022 , a decision handed down after the experts reports had been exchanged (and resulting 
in brief fourth reports from Counsellors Musu -Scott and Padmore) . An employee o f a bank 
was summoned to the managing director’s office for their regular meeting, where he was 
assaulted (the managing director throwing a calculator at him). He sued the managing 
director and the bank, arguing that “the negligence of the employee is imputable to the 
employer if the relationship of princip[al] -agent exi sts at the time of and in respect of the 
transaction out of which the specific injury arose”. It is clear from the case that the bank 
argued that it could not be liable for “an unlawful action of any of its employees while 
acting totally outside of h is legitimate scope of authority”, and it also quoted (without 
express attribution) the passage in Woodin  set out at [ 179] above.  The Supreme Court held 
that the wrongful act had been committed on the bank’s premises at a meeting arranged in 
accordance with the scope of duty and authority of the managing director, and that the bank 
was vicariously liable for the assault.   
186. The decision in Guaranty Trust is important. The court clearly had Woodin  (which was 
cited to it) in mind, but reached a decision which w as inconsistent with the “general rule” 
for which I am asked to treat Woodin as authority. The court cited U.S. commentaries in 
support of its decision which do not themselves reflect the limitation in the doctrine of 
vicarious liability for which Orange L iberia contend s. Counsellor  Padmore sought to 
suggest that the decision made a limited in -road into  Woodin  – either because the assault 
took place on the bank’s premises or because it was an assault by a fellow employee. That 
latter justification, if corre ct, would involve Liberian law following the reverse trajectory 
from English and US law, in which there was initially no vicarious liability for employee -
on-employee torts (the “common employment” rule). However, Counsellor  Padmore 
accepted that neither po int of distinction is relied upon by the Supreme Court in its 
judgment. The case provides a useful litmus test of Counsellors Musu -Scott’s and 
Padmore’s prior opinions on the scope of vicarious liability under Liberian law, and 
provides strong support for the views of the former  on an issue on which judicial policy is

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
54 
 particularly important . Taken with the wholly uncertain basis for Woodin  and the cases 
which have ignored the supposed limitation  for which Orange Liberia contends, Guaranty 
Trust establishes, to my satisfaction, that provided deliberate wrongdoing is undertaken by 
the employee within the scope of their employment, there is no rule of Liberian law which 
prevents the employer from being vicariously liable.  The suggesti on that it would have 
required an express reference to and overruling of Woodin  for the Supreme Court to have 
formulated the law in these terms attributes too great a weight to Woodin , and assumes what 
I am satisfied is an over -idealised characterisation o f the Liberian judicial system in 
practical operation.  
187. The effect of this conclusion is that the law of Liberia  on the issue of vicarious liability is, 
in this respect, broadly consistent with that of the two jurisdictions from which its common 
law heritag e is derived.  Counsello r Padmore suggested that what on his evidence was a 
different  principle in Liberia reflected “Liberia’s domestic policy to encourage 
intern[ational] parties to incorporate offshore corporations under Liberian law”, and to 
“favor busi ness interests and to avoid imposing broad liability on businesses, hence the 
adoption of Delaware corporations law as Liberian law in most respects”. Whether that 
policy is reflected in a 1922 decision about the Liberian postal service is, in my respectfu l 
view, debateable. It was not suggested th at Delaware law recognised such a limitation on 
the doctrine of vicarious liability, and I suspect that the reality of the attitude of the Liberian 
courts is better caught by Counsellor  Padmore’s observation that the bank in Guaranty 
Trust was always going to be found liable for the tort of its foreign national managing 
director against a local (“the Supreme Court of Liberia would never have failed to hold the 
bank responsible in those circumstances ”), and that his  advice to one of Liberia’s largest 
international corporations was “settle your cases and do your very best to come up with an 
arbitration”, that company never having prevailed in the Supreme Court or at any other 
level in Liberia, to his knowledge.  
E6(2)  Can an Employer/ Principal be Held Civilly Liable for a Breach of s.7 6 of the 2007 Act 
Committed by an Employee/ Agent?  
188. No separate issue in respect of vicarious liability under the 2007 Act was crystallised at 
trial. The issue was considered by Professor Banks. The effect of his opinion is that the 
same test of vicarious liability applies to s.76 and s.80 as applies at common law, noting 
the “all the violations for which the perpetrators are deemed to have committed a crime 
under section 76 are g rounded in intentional misconduct”, but accepting nonetheless that 
“the agent must have been acting within the scope of his employment in order for the 
principal to be held vicariously liable”. In relation to s.80, he advised:  
“Sub -section (2) of Section 8 0 … states that ‘any action brought pursuant to this 
Section shall be subject to the practices and procedures of the applicable court in such 
matters’. The practices and procedures include the measures for holding a person 
vicariously liable … which have b een espoused by the Supreme Court and which are 
adhered to by the lower courts before whom the actions are instituted”.  
189. I have concluded that there is no intentional tort exception to the vicarious liability doctrine 
at Liberian common law. However, I woul d note that there appear s even less scope for such 
a limitation under the 2007 Act. Section s.76 of the 2007 Act creates various offences

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
55 
 dependent on wrongful or dishonest intent. As Counsellor Musu -Scott pointed out in her 
first report, companies can com mit these offences (and therefore, necessarily, have the 
dishonest intent of natural persons attributed to them for the purpose of criminal liability ): 
see not simply the definition of “person” but also s.77(1 )(b)), and the statute expressly 
provides for t he independent criminal liability of natural persons who are officers, 
employees or agents of such a company and are responsible for the breach. Vicarious 
liability for the intentional acts of officers, employees or agents is “baked in” to the criminal 
offences created by the 2007 Act. There is nothing in s.80, dealing with the position where 
acts contrary to the 2007 Act have caused loss, to suggest it applies to a narrow er class of 
persons than those who can commit the s.76 offences.   
E6(3)  What  Test Determines Whether Someone is an Employee for the Purposes of Vicarious 
Liability?  
190. It is common ground that there is no fixed definition of the concept of “employee” under 
Liberian law, with the expression taking its meaning from the context in which it appear s, 
and turning on “the facts and circumstances of a particular case” ( Firestone Plantation Co 
v Burge [1985] LRSC 20). Many of the Liberian cases in which the issue has been 
considered are “inwards -looking ” cases, concerning the rights of the putative empl oyee and 
employer inter se, and in particular those which are intended to provide certain forms of 
statutory protection to employees.  However, the issue s arising in this case are essentially 
“outward -looking”, determining when the victims of the putative e mployee’s torts can 
recover from the putative employer.  Legal questions of this type raise policy considerations 
of ensuring that enterprises bear the adverse consequences (and the costs of those 
consequences) which their activities bring about  (factors re ferred to in the American Digest, 
Corpus Juris Secundum , ¶206 cited by the Liberian Supreme Court in Guaranty Trust Bank 
(Liberia) Ltd v Freeman 23 September 2022) . That is a very different policy consideration 
from that animating statutes in tended  to protect the rights of those who are, generally, in a 
subordinate bargaining position, and who benefit from certain statutory protections both in 
relation to their conditions of work, the ir levels of remuneration and when and how the 
relevant relationsh ip may be brought to an end.  
191. The first legal issue which arises is the position of seconded employees – where someone 
under an employment contract with company X is seconded by company X to company Y 
to provide the services of an employee for company Y, an d commits a tort in the context of 
providing those services. The only case dealing with seconded employees to which I was 
referred was International Bank of Monrovia v Och oada [2013] LRSC 17. In that case, 
there was what appears to be a relatively common a rrangement for expatriates working  in 
Liberia, in which the claimant had an employment contract with an offshore company , 
ADCON, but acted as the general manager of IB/ITC , a Liberian bank. When he was 
dismissed from his position, he brought a claim for wr ongful dismissal against IB /ITC . The 
Supreme Court held that the written contract of employment between the claimant and 
ADCON was the best evidence of who his employer was. This was also an “inwards -
looking” case, and the decision of the Supreme Court was  not reached on the basis of a 
legal ruling (that the written contract of employment was legally determinative) but on the 
basis of the balance of the evidence , on which the first -tier tribunal’s conclusions were 
determinative and, also, correct . However, the Supreme Court judgment did hold that the 
claimant could only have been employed by one of ADCON or IB/ITC.

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
56 
 192. Given its context (an “inwards -looking” dispute) and the basis on which it was reasoned 
(the limited right of the court below to review findings of fact and what the balance of the 
evidence established), I have not found Ochoada particularly enlightening  on the issues 
before me. It is clear under Liberian law that there can be vicarious liability for the acts of 
natural persons even if they are not  parties to contracts of employment with the defendant. 
In Kantara Malian Kam ara v APM Terminals Ltd  29 September 2017, in which the terminal 
(APM) had hired a firm of stevedores (Camer), whose crane driver had negligently dropped 
cargo on the claimant’s t rucks , APM was held vicariously liable for th e neglige nt operation 
of the crane  under the doctrine of respondeat superior  on the basis that it had retained (or, 
as it was put, “employed”) Camer to discharge the cargo. Camer was also held liable.  
193. This suggests that the question of whether the doctrine of vicarious lia bility is engaged 
under Liberian law does not depend upon the existence of a contract of employment alone. 
Indeed,  were matters otherwise, it would be all to easy for corporations in Liberi a to avoid 
any liability for tortious acts arising from their operations, particularly when these arose 
from the actions of senior management, by “off -shoring” the employment contract: 
something which appears to be a prevalent business practice  there . The APM  case also 
show s that two defendants can be vicariously liable for the same tortious act (in that case 
APM and Camer ), something which Counsellor Padmore accepted was conceptually 
possible under Liberian law.   
194. Finally, there is the question of when a to rtious act will fall within the scope of an 
employee’s employment.  Once again, I was not referred to any Liberian legal source 
expressly addressing this issue. Counsellor M usu-Scott  suggested that “all that is usually 
required for the conduct to be within the scope of the employee’s employment is a 
connection between the wrong doing and their employment or role” , and that the Liberian 
courts adopted “a broad (and generally inclusive) approach to the question of whether an 
individual has acted outside the sco pe of their employment or role”.  Counsellor Padmore 
suggested that Liberian courts would look at  section 7.07(2) of the Restatement (Third) of 
the Law of Age ncy¸ which provid es that “an employee’s act is not within the scope of 
employment when it occurs wi thin an independent course of conduct not intended by the 
employee to serve any purpose of the employer”.   
195. I am sure that both of these elements  – connection between the wrongdoing and the role, 
and the employee’s purpose – are relevant to the enquiry. On the basis of the authorities 
placed before me, I am satisfied that an extreme and criminal pursuit of the employee’s 
duties can nonetheless fall within the scope of employment (as seen in the cases where 
employers have been held liable for vicious crimi nal assaults by  a bank executive, security 
guards or public officials). I am also satisfied that the mere fact that the employees are 
acting for their own nefarious purposes does not necessarily preclude vicarious liability  in 
a case in which their positio n as employees provides the means and opportunity for them 
to advantage themselves . In NPA v Dougbah  5 February 2016, a container was held by the 
port authority for  alleged  non-payment of fees. Before selling the contents  at what was 
meant to be a public a uction , the National Port Authority was required to notify the owner . 
The c laimant’s goods were alleged to have been sold by NPA staff who manipulated 
procedures  and breached protocols “for their own personal aggrandizement”.  NPA’s 
managing director admitt ed that some staff had manipulated the system, and had been  
dismissed. NPA was held liable. Finally, I note that in Guaranty Trust  Bank (Liberia) Ltd

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
57 
 v Freeman 23 September 202 2, the Supreme Court emphasised th at the managing director 
had “used his authori ty” to harm the claimant at a meeting occurring “in the regular course 
of business”, the tort being committed while performing an official duty in holding the 
meeting. Those matters were sufficient to render the bank liable.  
196. In short, it is clear that the following factors are relevant  without being determinative , but 
the issue of whether a particular act occurs within the scope of employment is a fact -
dependent question:  
i) whether the employee is performing a function or advancing an interest which his 
emplo yment requires him to perform or advance;  
ii) whether the employee was seeking to advance his own interest; and  
iii) whether the employee is using an opportunity or means arising from his employment.  
E6(4)  In what Circumstances (if any) Can Wrongful Conduct by a Natural Person be Attributed 
to a Company?  
197. In the alternative to its case on vicarious liability, Lonestar argued that the actions of Mr 
Marziano are legally attributable to Orange Liberia on the basis that Mr Marziano w as the 
“directing mind and will ” of the company . While Counsellor Musu -Scott suggested that 
Liberian courts would recognise a principle of attribution of this kind, she was unable to 
point to any supporting authority (the decision of In the Intestate of the late Shad Kaydea v 
The Turay F amily [2015] LRSC 37, to which she referred, being addressed to  different 
issues altogether ). 
198. I was not persuaded that there was such a principle of Liberian law, or that one would be 
recognised by the Liberian courts. I was not pointed to any principle of U.S. law to similar 
effect (which, as I have stated, would be the first “port of call” of a L iberian court looking 
at the position under other legal systems). I accept Counsellor  Padmore’s evidence that 
Liberian law would look, in particular, to Delaware law on an issue of this kind, and that 
Delaware law does not recognise this basis for the liability of corporations.  
E7 Exemplary Damages  
199. It was agreed by the experts that Liberian law permits an award of exemplary damage s in 
cases of malice, fraud or gross negligence ( Itoka v Noelke [1939] LRSC 1). That case states 
that in order for punitive damag es to be award ed, “there must enter into the injury some 
element of aggravation, or some coloring of insult or malice that will take the case outside 
of the ordinary rule of compensation”.  
200. Counsellor Padmore (and Professor Banks) suggested that Liberian la w would not award 
exemplary damages in circumstances in which an employer was held vicariously liable for 
an employee’s  tort, but had not authorised or ratified the tort.  The scepticism which the 
Supreme Court expressed about the award of punitive damages in the Guaranty Trust case 
lends some support for that view, as do statements in Story on Agency which is a text cited 
in some Liberian decisions  on agency and authority issues . Counsellor Musu -Scott 
challenge d that view, pointing to the award of punitive damages in Firestone Liberia v

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
58 
 Kollie et al [2016] LRSC 33 , a case which involved extreme facts, and personally 
reprehensible conduct by the employer . Whether or not the re is an absolute rule of the kind 
for wh ich Counsellor Padmore and Professor Banks contend, I accept that the fact that the 
liability of the employer is vicarious in nature, and that the acts in question were not 
authorised or ratified, are highly relevant factors when considering whether to exe rcise the 
discretion to award punitive damages.  
201. It was common ground that punitive damages would not be awarded in a case in which 
compensatory damages were sufficient to achieve the purpose of punishment on their own, 
and, that where they are awarded, it is only to the extent that, together with any 
compensatory damages, they are sufficient to achieve that purpose  (Firestone v Kollie ). 
Counsellor Padmore (and Professor Banks) suggested that the amount of punitive damages 
awarded in Liberia was “generally q uite modest” , although Counsellor Musu -Scott was 
able to point to figures ranging from 3% to 200% of the amount of general damages (the 
latter being in a case in which the defendant had also flagrantly defied a court order to cease 
the wrongful act). As such awards are generally made by juries in Liberia , it is difficult to 
draw any conclusions as to the ir “usual” level beyond noting that each case will depend on 
its particular facts. Awards of punitive damages have been made in cases of bodily injury 
(Kollie) and financial loss ( City Buil ders). 
F THE CLAIM AGAINST THE INDIVIDUAL DEFENDANTS  
202. I have made various findings as to the actions of the Individual Defendants  in section D 
above. In addition to the contemporaneous documentary evidence , in interviews wit h the 
Cologne Prosecutor between 16 and 18 May 20 17, Mr Kaye confirmed  the following : 
i) He had carried out the DDOS Attacks  and had done so at Mr Marziano’s instigation 
in return for payment.  
ii) He and Mr Marziano had discussed how to implement the DDOS Attacks . 
iii) Mr Marziano had introduced him to Mr Polani who had provided him with technical 
support and assistance as required.  
iv) Mr Polani “checked network availability , monitored certain things and was in Liberia 
at the time, meaning he was able to monitor things locally”.  
203. Mr Marziano’s and Mr Polani’s contact details, and messages between the two of them and 
Mr Kaye, were found in Mr Kaye’s mobile phone.  
204. Against this ba ckground I am satisfied of the following:  
i) Mr Kaye undertook the DDOS Attacks, and breached s.76 of the 2007 Act in doing 
so. 
ii) He was solicited and encouraged to begin those attacks by Mr Marziano, who paid 
him to do so.  
iii) Mr Marziano  (and Mr Polani once he ha d become involved ) encouraged and assisted

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
59 
 the DDOS Attacks.  
iv) Mr Marziano and Mr Polani’s conduct also breached s.76 of the 2007 Act.  
v) Each of the Individual Defendants is, subject to any time bar  defence , liable to 
Lonestar under the action of damages for w rong for loss caused by the DDOS Attacks.  
vi) Given my conclusions as to the timing of loss in Section I below, it is not necessary 
to distinguish between the loss caused by Mr Kaye and Mr Marziano on the one hand, 
and Mr Polani on the other.  
G THE CLAIM AGAIN ST ORANGE LIBERIA  AND CELLCOM BVI  
G1 Were Mr Marziano and/or Mr Polani Employees of Orange Liberia and/or Cellcom 
BVI for the Purposes of the Doctrine of Vicarious Liability ? 
205. Mr Marziano joined Cellcom BVI in 2009, and was appointed CEO of Cellcom Liberia that 
year. However, he never had an employment contract with Cellcom Liberia.  In November 
2013, he ceased to be CEO of Cellcom Liberia and became CEO of Cellcom Guinea . He 
was also CEO of Cellcom BVI.  
206. Mr Polani joined Cellcom BVI in October 2010, and entered into an employment contract 
with Cellcom BVI at that stage. H e was appointed as Internet Service s Provider Business 
Unit Manager on joining Cellcom BVI . 
207. Throughout the peri od when Mr Marziano and Mr Polani were working for Cellcom 
Liberia:  
i) Neither of them had an employment contract with Cellcom Liberia.  
ii) Mr Polani had a written contract of employment with Cellcom BVI dated 15 
November 2010.  
iii) I am satisfied that Mr Marziano h ad either a formal or an informal employment 
contract with Cellcom BVI as well.  An unsigned contract appears in the trial bundles.  
iv) The principal salary of b oth Mr Marziano and Mr Polani w as paid by Cellcom BVI  
(although it is possible that Cellcom Liberia paid some form of expenses and local 
reimbursement).  
v) Mr Marziano appeared on the Cellcom Liberia “Employee Master List”.  
vi) In short, the position of Mr Marziano and Mr Polani appears to have resembled that 
of other expatriates discharging roles for companies in international ownership, 
operating in Liberia , a structure which may well have reflected concerns about the 
risk of Liberian withholding tax . 
208. When considering whether Cellcom/Orange Liberia can be vicariously liable for the acts of 
Mr Marziano  and Mr Polani, i t is helpful to begin by consider ing the position before the

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
60 
 DDOS Attacks began. During that period, it cannot, in my assessment, be seriously argued 
that the fact that Mr Marzian o’s and Mr Polani’s employment contract s were with Cellcom 
BVI and not Cellcom Liberia had the legal effect that any torts committed within the scope 
of performing their roles at Cellcom Liberia could not engage the doctrine of vicarious 
liability under Liberian law. In functional terms, Mr Marziano and Mr Polani w ere Cellcom 
Liberia employees. Their services were performed exclusively for Cellcom Liberia. Mr 
Marziano’s central role was such that, when Mr Coulibaly took over from him , a 10-day 
handover period was required.  
209. When, in the binding offer of 31 July 201 5, Orange CDI stated that it was a condition of 
the offer that “key management continue to remain employed by the Company for the 
transitional period of 18 months post Closing”, it was the “off -shored” expatriates they were 
most concerned with, not those who se written contracts of employment were with Cellcom 
Liberia.  I am satisfied that t hat reality would  be reflected in the application of the doctrine 
of vicarious liability under Liberian law.  
210. Turning to the subsequent  period, it is important to note the DD OS Attacks, and the 
Individual Defendants ’ involvement with them, all began before Cellcom BVI agreed to 
sell the shares to the Orange Group pursuant to the S PA of 1 8 December 2015  (albeit after 
the July 2015 binding offer to purchase). T he actual transfer  of those shares from Cellcom 
BVI occurred in April 2016.  Looking at the position up until April  2016 , I am not persuaded 
that the contractual arrangements between Cellcom BVI and Orange change d Mr Marziano 
and Mr Polani’s status as employees of Cellcom Li beria for vicarious liability purposes. 
However, I accept that the prospective transfer, given i ts implications for Mr Marziano’s 
and Mr Polani’s motivation , may well be relevant to the issue of whether their involvement 
in the DDOS Attacks fell within the  scope of their employment with Cellcom Liberia.  
211. The TSA of 5 April 2016 provided for Cellcom BVI to provide certain consultancy services 
to Orange Liberia for a transitional period, including through certain named individuals: 
Mr Marziano until 31 January  2017, and Mr Polani until 31 July 2017. This was a provision 
intended to maintain the status quo during the transition period, clause 3.3 providing that 
the services were to be provided “substantially on the same basis … and for the same 
purpose as they w ere provided … immediately prior to the date hereof and shall be used 
…. for the same purpose for which they were provided prior to the date hereof”.  Term Sheet 
2.3 provided that the services of the named  22 expatriate employees w ere to be provided 
“on the  same level as currently provided to the Target Company” on a full-time basis.  The 
TSA  provided that:  
i) The expatriates would be subject to the existing Cellcom BVI insurances,  with 
Orange Liberia being invoiced for the cost.  
ii) Cellcom BVI would pay the monthl y salary and annual bonus of the named 
expatriates, but reinvoice Orange Liberia for the costs.  
iii) Orange Liberia would pay for flights, “specific advantages” and “local 
reimbursement” . 
212. Once again,  I am not persuaded that these change in the legal structures by which Mr

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
61 
 Marziano and Mr Polani came to be performing their roles with Orange Liberia affected 
their position as, in functional terms, employees of Orange Liberia. Both before and after 5 
April 2016, their contracts of employment were with Cellcom BVI, and they were paid by 
Cellcom BVI, but they worked exclusively (or in the case of Mr Marziano, principally) for 
Orange Liberia. Indeed, once the TSA had been concluded, the salaries and benefits of Mr 
Marziano and Mr Polani were ultimately paid by Orange Liberia (who reimbursed Cellcom 
BVI). As Mr Coulibaly acknowledged, it was Mr Marziano to whom the day -to-day running 
of Orange Liberia was left.  In the Orange Liberia employee handbook, as he had  in the 
Cellcom Liberia employee handbook which preceded it, Mr Marziano acknowledged the 
reality of his position when addressing the handbook to his “fellow employees” . The 
handbooks also acknowledged his responsibility “for the overall management and ope ration 
of the company”. Mr Marziano attended the three meetings of the Orange Liberia bo ard 
which took place between April 2016 and Mr Marziano’s departure in January 2017 . 
213. I am satisfied, therefore, that Mr Marziano and Mr Pol ani were employees of Orange 
Liberia throughout the period of the DDOS Attacks  for the purpose of the doctrine of 
vicarious liability . I am satisfied that they were also employees of Cellcom BVI for the 
purposes of that doctrine (and for other purposes). They had enter ed into contract s of 
employment  with Cellcom BVI, which had seconded them to Orange Liberia . I am satisfied 
that Liberian law accommodates the possibility of two principals being vicariously liable 
for the same act.  
214. That leaves the separate and distinct issue of whether,  in instigating, planning and assisting 
in the DDOS Attacks, Mr Marziano and Mr Polani were acting within the scope of their 
respective employment s. I will first consider that issue by reference to the position of 
Orange Liberia, and then by reference to t he position of Cellcom BVI, being conscious that 
the answer need not necessarily be the same  in each case . 
G2 Did Mr Marziano’s and Mr Pol ani’s Involvement in the DDOS Attacks Fall Within 
the Scope of their  Employment with Orange Liberia?  
215. This is an important, and difficult issue, in relation to  which the underlying facts are 
relatively straightforward, but their overall effect under Liberian law more challenging.  
216. My findings of fact are as follows:  
i) Mr Marziano was responsible for, and in c ontrol of, the day -to-day operation of 
Cellcom/Orange Liberia throughout the DDOS Attacks.   
ii) His responsibilities included promoting Orange Liberia’s sales, having ultimate 
oversight of its technical performance,  the quality of its network, its customer service 
and marketing, analysing and reporting on its financial performance, helping to set 
and seeking to ensure it met financial targets  and overseeing human resources issues . 
iii) In this capacity, part of Mr Marziano’s functions included approving means to win 
customers or business from Lonestar. In email exchanges on 20 July 2016, he referred 
to steps being taken to improve Orange Liberia’s data performance, which included 
“targeting MTN’s data users” and “acquisition of heavy data users”, and refe rred to 
a “Data War” Lonestar had declared by reducing its prices. He concluded “If MTN

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
62 
 will react with more data that what we are off ering, I have Plan B and Plan C      ”. 
While Mr Marziano would never have admitted this, I am satisfied that the ongoing 
DDO S Attacks were one of the plans he was referring to.  
iv) So far as Mr Polani is concerned,  there is less clarity as to what his role in 
Cellcom/Orange Liberia comprised. However, it included managing internal assets, 
and aspects of business development, in par ticular for business (so -called “B2B” ) 
customers, and helping with installation and after -sales support. I accept on the 
evidence that part of his role included procuring DDOS protection for 
Cellcom/Orange Liberia  and offering his opinion as to its adequac y.  
v) Mr Marziano and Mr Polani kept their activities in relation to the DDOS Attacks 
secret from other employees at Orange Liberia  (and Cellcom BVI) . They used 
personal and/or encrypted messages rather than their Orange Liberia or Cellcom BVI 
emails to comm unicate and Mr Marziano used his personal, rather than corporate, 
funds to pay Mr Kaye  (although he did use his Orange Liberia email when arranging 
one payment) . 
vi) With one possible exception, Mr Marziano and Mr Polani’s actions in relation to the 
DDOS Attac ks did not use any equipment of Orange Liberia, or exploit any 
opportunity which came to them in their capacity as Orange Liberia employees , nor 
did their employment by Orange Liberia  leave them better placed to facilitate such 
attacks . The exception is th at I accept that information sent to Mr Polani in relation 
to the DDOS Attacks in his role for Orange Liberia might well have assisted him in 
feeding back information to Mr Kaye, although it is not possible to determine on the 
evidence whether this did hap pen. 
vii) The immediate purpose of Mr Marziano’s and Mr Polani’s activities was to damage 
Lonestar because it was Orange Liberia’s principal rival, in order to improve Orange 
Liberia’s financial performance in what was essentially a two -player market.  This 
was to be done by encouraging customer s of Lonestar to switch their subscriptions 
and/or use from Lonestar to Orange Liberia.  However, neither of them held any 
personal animus against Lonestar. The losses to Lonestar were simply a means to the 
end of improving  Orange Liberia’s performance. Nor did they have any intention of 
damaging Orange Liberia (on the contrary).  
viii) Subject to one possible qualification, t he intermediate purpose of Mr Marziano’s and 
Mr Polani’s activities was, by improving Orange Liberia’s financial performance, to 
increase the amounts paid by Orange Liberia to Cellcom BVI under the performance -
related provisions of the S PA, albeit the benefit to Cellcom BVI would not be co -
extensive with the benefit to Orange Liberia (Orange Liber ia would continue to 
benefit from customers and usage gained from Lonestar through the DDOS Attacks 
after the end of the period relevant to the Earn Out  Payments ). 
ix) The possible qualification arises from the fact that the Ear n Out Payments were linked 
to Orange Liberia’s financial performance up to 30 June 2016. However, Mr Kaye 
redoubled his DDOS Attack efforts in the second -half of 2016, presumably at Mr 
Marziano’s continuing instigation. No distinction was drawn in argument in relation

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
63 
 to the period befor e and after 30 June 2016, so I should simply note that I am unable 
to make a finding as to whether Mr Marziano and Mr Pol ani had an intermediate 
purpose after 30 June 2016 and, if so, what it was . 
x) The ultimate purpose of Mr Marziano’s and Mr Polani’s activ ities was to benefit 
themselves financially  – in relation to activities up to 30 June 2016 , through benefits 
they hoped to obtain from Cellcom BVI through their employment relationship with 
Cellcom BVI , and in ways which are not clear to me in relation to the subsequent 
period . 
217. Taking the position of Mr Marziano first, I am satisfied that his involvement in the DDOS 
Attacks can fairly be characterised as a wholly impermissible (and I accept, so far as the 
Orange Group was concerned, wholly unauthorised) means of pursuing his responsibility 
and role of moving customers and usage from Lonestar to Orange Liberia, with the 
immediate object of benefiting Orange Liberia. That provides very strong support for the 
suggestion that the tortious means by which this asp ect of his role was pursued fell within 
the scope of his employment. If, for example, Mr Marziano had pursued the same goal by 
planting false statements about the reliability of Lonestar’s data network in the press, rather 
than criminally creating a state of unreliability, I would have thought it obvious that the 
wrongful act fell within the scope of his employment. I am not persuaded that the fact that 
he acted in secret and used his own financial resources is sufficient to alter that conclusion 
(any more  than if he had used his own financial resources to pay a bribe to secure a valuable 
contract for Orange Liberia). Employees who use dishonest means to secure a financial 
benefit for their employers (and thereby benefit themselves) frequently act secretly, and in 
ways which are less amenable to discovery, not least for fear of being stopped or sacked.  
218. The issue which gives me pause for  thought is the fact that Mr Marziano only wished to 
improve Orange Liberia’s financial position as a means of benefiting Cel lcom BVI, through 
the earn out provisions in the S PA, and ultimately himself  (I will assume for this purpose 
that this is true of the entire DDOS Attack period: cf. [216 (ix)] above) . However, I am not 
persuaded that this makes any difference. It will usual ly be the case that an employee who 
pursues his responsibilities or seeks to achieve a financial benefit for his employer through 
tortious means does so ultimately to benefit himself, through a bonus, promotion or simply 
greater prospects of job retention.  Wholly altruistic employee torts must be a rarity. I am 
not persuaded that the interposition of Cellcom BVI changes the analysis (any more than a 
case in which the employee hoped to realise their personal benefit through a shareholding 
in the employer’s h olding company, which might attract an indirect benefit from the 
financial benefit to the subsidiary). I am satisfied, therefore, that Mr Marziano’s 
involvement in the DDOS Attacks fell within the scope of his employment  with Orange 
Liberia.  
219. In these circu mstances, it is not strictly necessary to consider the position of Mr Polani. It 
is more difficult, on the evidence before me, to characterise the personal scope of his 
employment as extending to winning business from Lonestar, although, at least in the B2 B 
sphere, he had some business development responsibilities. There is a marginally stronger 
case for arguing th at his employment with Orange Liberia assisted him in supporting Mr 
Kaye. What is ultimately decisive, in my view, is that his role at Orange Lib eria clearly 
included supporting Mr Marziano,  as CEO, in discharging his duties. In these

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
64 
 circumstances, it would be wholly artificial in my view to distinguish between Mr Marziano 
and Mr Polani on the issue of whether their involvement in the DDOS Attacks fell within 
their scope of employment. I am satisfied that in Mr Polani’s case, as well, the answer is 
that it did.  
G3 The Liability of Cellcom BVI  
220. Mr Marziano was Group CEO of Cellcom BVI  from  November 2013 to 22 January 2019, 
and he was held out as such to third parties, including in the “Information Memorandum” 
prepared in March 2014 in rel ation to a proposed sale of Cellcom BVI . I have found his 
contract of employment was with Cellcom BVI.  On the evidence, he played an important 
role in the sale of Cellcom Liberia to the Orange Group. He prepared financial analyses for 
the beneficial owners  of Cellcom BVI and attended due diligence meetings with the Orange 
Group.  He provided input into the drafting of the S PA and the consulting services 
agreement . 
221. The extent of his involvement can be seen in the $2.8m bonus he received on the closing 
of the sale (calculated at 3% of the sale price). Mr Adam Cohen, a director of Cellcom BVI, 
wrote to Mr Marziano in December 2015 saying:  
“Avishai Fantastic performance today. Great outcome for Cellcom owners and for 
the employees who also deserve recognition. Yo ur 3% is very well earned on the 
value you delivered and will continue to generate!”  
222. Cellcom BVI paid Mr Marziano a bonus of US$170,000 in December 2016, when Cellcom 
BVI received the last Earn Out Payment, and a further bonus of US$90,000 in April 2017 
when that part of the purchase price which had been paid into escrow was released . There 
is at least some evidence of Mr Marziano reporting on Orange Liberia’s performance to 
Cellcom B VI (his emails of 12 August 2016 and 31 January 2007, sent from a Cellcom 
BVI address). Neither Mr Marziano nor Cellcom BVI have chosen to offer any explanation 
for their interactions during the period from the TSA, and whether Mr Marziano continued 
to perform a role for Cellcom BVI in relation to the S PA during th e peri od when he was 
acting as CEO of Orange Liberia . Finally, I have found that Mr Marziano instigated the 
DDOS Attacks in order to increase the amounts payable by the Orange Group to Cellcom 
BVI under the Earn Out provisions of the S PA. Cleary it was his emplo yment by Cellcom 
BVI, and the opportunity for reward which that provided, which led him to instigate the 
DDOS Attacks.  
223. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the scope of Mr Marziano’s employment for 
Cellcom BVI throughout the DDOS Attack period inclu ded protecting its interests and 
maximising its return under the SpA, and that the DDOS Attacks fell within that scope of 
employment.   
224. I do not propose, in the circumstances, to address the position of Mr Polani, or Lonestar’s 
attribution argument under the law of the British Virgin Islands.  
H Cellcom BVI’s limitation defence  
225. Cellcom BVI, but not Orange Liberia, advances a limitation defence in the event (as I have

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
65 
 held) that it is liable to Lonestar on the basis of the action of damages for wrong, but not 
otherwise. This is because the claim on the action of damages for wrong was only 
introduced into these proceedings by amendment on 29 September 2021, and the applicable 
limitation period under the Foreign Limitation Periods Act 1984 ( FLPA 1984 ) is three 
years under the 1972  Act. 
226. I am satisfied that there is nothing in this point:  
i) CPR 17.4 allows a court to add a new claim after a limitation period (including one 
applicable by virtue of FLPA 1984  or “any other enactment which allows such an 
amendment , or under which such an amendment is allowed” ) has expired, provided 
the new claim “arises out of the same facts, or substantially the same facts” as those 
in respect of which the claimant has already claimed a remedy.  
ii) It has been held that the Rome II Re gulation falls within the phrase “any other 
enactment” for the purpose of CPR 17.4, and that it allows an amendment for CPR 
17.4 purposes ( PJS Tatneft v Bogolyubov [2017] EWCA Civ 1581, [77] -[81] and 
Qatar Airways Group QCSC v Middle Eastern News FZ -LLC [2021] EWHC 2180 
(QB), [15] -[16]).  
iii) If relevant,  Counsellors Musu -Scott and Padmore accept that “relation back” is also 
allowed under Liberian law, by virtue of s.9.10(4) of the 1972 Act.  
iv) I am satisfied that the action of damages for wrong arises, or substant ially arises, out 
of the claims which Lonestar had already pleaded.   
I WHAT LOSS HAS LONESTAR SUFFERED?  
227. Lonestar’s causation and quantum case w as advanced (in broad terms) by calculating (i) 
how many subscribers Lonestar was alleged to have lost as a result of the DDOS Attacks 
and (ii) how far Lonestar’s ARPU fell as a result of the DDOS Attacks.  
228. The issues between the parties are explored in the following sections . 
I1 Subscriber losses  
229. In relation to the first element (lost subscribers), it is common ground that after a period of 
steady growth, the number of Lonestar’s subscribers (voice and data) began to decline from 
August 2016 to April 2017. Of the total subscriber loss of 220,000 over this period, Mr 
Nicholson say s that 150,000 were lost as a resu lt of the DDOS Attacks.  Mr Thomas 
suggests that the correct figure is 90,000 subscribers. The difference between them turns 
on three issues.  
230. The first issue is how many of those subscribers were lost as a result of integration with 
another mobile network a cquired by Lonestar in July 2016, Novafone. While this was 
initially a source of additional subscribers, difficulties encountered with the integration 
process led to 50% of those “new” subscribers being lost.  
231. Mr Thomas’ opinion is that 60,000 subscribers w ere lost through the Novafone integration

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
66 
 process, a figure taken from a September 2017 Executive Committee Paper which refers to 
the Novafone acquisition adding a 4% market share. A four percent market share would 
equate to 120,000 subscribers. Mr Nichols on agrees with the broad mechanics of this 
calculation, but suggests that the starting point of 120,000 subscribers acquired from 
Novafone is too high. He relies on a spreadsheet referring to 70,000 2G and 3G voice 
subscribers (but not data subscribers).  
232. This is a question on which it should have been possible for Lonestar to adduce clear 
evidence. However, the overall effect of the documents is that a figure of 70,000 additional 
subscribers is too low. Lonestar’s due diligence report on the Novafone acquis ition refers 
to Novafone having 130,000 subscribers as at March 2015, 75,000 voice and 55,000 data. 
If 55,000 data subscribers are added to the voice subscribers identified in the document 
relied upon by Mr Nicholson, a total figure of in excess of 120,000  for voice and data 
subscribers is arrived at. Other documents would point to even higher figures. While a 
December 2015 operations review document prepared  by Lonestar refers to Novafone 
having 45,000 subscribers, this must be viewed in the light of the fact that Lonestar was 
significantly overestimating its own market share at this point (and  hence  underestimating 
Novafone’s).  
233. The second issue concerns the effect of Lonestar’s decision to pass on the 1c per minute 
excise tax in January 2017. Lonestar’s co ntemporaneous assessment was that this caused 
the loss of 70,000 customers. Mr Nicholson thinks that estimate was too high by a factor of 
two. However, there are other internal Lonestar documents supporting an impact at or even 
above the 70,000 level, and Lonestar called no witness to support a lower figure.  
234. Finally, there is an issue of whether allowance should be made for other factors causing lost 
subscribers. Mr Nicholson originally allowed 10% for losses due to other factors. Mr 
Thomas has never sought  to effect a further allowance, but has maintained his 90,000 
figure. I accept that figure may well be conservative, but in circumstances in which Mr 
Thomas put that figure forward to the court as the figure it should find, and did not put 
forward or justi fy an alternative figure, I am satisfied that the figure for lost subscribers 
established on the evidence is 90,000.  
I2 The Loss of Data and Voice ARPU  
I2(1) Lonestar’ s case 
235. So far as the second element (reduction in ARPU) is concerned, Lonestar’s case is as 
follows:  
i) While Lonestar’s ARPU  for voice  and data  customers  had fallen for a number of years 
in the face of competition from Cellcom Liberia, the respective ARPUs of the two 
competitors on a combined voice/data basis had achieved a level of stability for a 6-
month  period before the DDOS Attacks bega n. 
ii) However, fro m October 2015 Lonestar’s combined ARPU began to fall relative to 
that of Cellcom/Orange Liberia, which decline continued to February 2017. The 
relative ARPUs of Lonestar and Cellcom/Orange Liberia over the period moved such 
that the change in the average difference between the two amounts  to $2. 39. Of this,

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
67 
 Mr Nicholson attributed 70% (US$1. 67) to the DDOS Attacks. The 70% figure is 
arrived at by:  
a) quantifying the effect of one specific event (the January 2017 decision by 
Lonestar to pass on the excise tax)  at 24% of the swing  which happened 
between December 2016 and February 2017, which he round ed to “at least 
20%” (meaning 80% was down to something else);  
b) assuming that ordinary competition could not have been responsible for more 
than 40% of the ARPU swing , because otherwise Lonestar’s ARPU would have 
fallen below Cellcom/Orange Liberia’s during “a relatively short period of 
time”, a period significantly shorter than that seen in an analysis of “two player” 
mobile phone markets in other West Africa n states  (meaning that 60% was 
down to something else);  
c) taking 70% as the midpoint.  
236. It will  be apparent that Mr Nicholson’s ARPU analysis is performed on a combined 
voice/data basis, even though the DDOS Attacks only directly impacted users of Lonestar’s 
data offer ing. Mr Singla KC explained in closing that, on Lonestar’s case, “what was 
happening was customers from Lonestar, high value customers, were switching their data 
usage and then the voice usage was following the data usage”.  
237. In my assessment, it is necessar y to analyse data and voice ARPU separately. This approach 
is analytically sounder, accords with Lonestar’s inter nal approach and better reflects the 
different nature of the two markets, and the different factors impacting upon them.  
238. Turning to the underly ing data:  
i) Lonestar’s combined ARPU was 3.67 in October 2015, 3.66 in November, 3.70 in 
December, 3.29 in January and 2.86 in February. The fall in combined voice/data 
ARPU, therefore, did not take place until January and February 2016.  
ii) Lonestar’s voice ARP U follows the same course: 3.32 in October, 3.33 in November, 
3.32 in December, 2.96 in January and 2.54 in February.  
iii) Lonestar’s data ARPU – where the principal and initial impact of the DDOS Attacks 
would be felt – remain ed relatively steady throughout: 0 .35 in October, 0.32 in 
November, 0.32 in December, 0.33 in January and 0.32 in February.  
iv) Lonestar’s voice usage grew from October to December 2015, and then fell 
dramatically: 136 in October, 139 in November, 147 in December, 127 in January 
and 121 in Feb ruary.  
v) Lonestar’s data usage – as to wh ich I repeat the observation in (iii) above  – was 19 in 
October, 18 in November, 24 in December, 27 in January and 26 in February. It 
increased by 28% in Q1 2016 as against Q4 2015, and increased again in Q2 2016.  
239. Once allowance has been made for Lonestar’s January 2017 decision to pass on the excise

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
68 
 tax, the swing in combined voice/data ARPU largely occurred during the first half of 2016 
(at a stage when there had been relatively few effective DDOS Attacks), not the period from 
July 2016 onwards, when the DDOS Attacks were most effective. Of a total swing of $1.90 
after taking the January 2017 tax assessment out of the picture, $1 .64 occurs before July 
2016 and $0.25 afterwards.  Looking at voice and data separately:  
i) The voice swing also largely occurred in the first half of 2016. Of the total swing of 
$1.99, $1.55 occurred before July 2016. Lonestar’s voice ARPU then largely levelled 
off until the January 2017 decision to pass on the excise tax:  
 
ii) Only in data is the swing greater in the second half of 2016 (of the total swing of 
$0.40, $0.30 occurred after 30 June 2016), something which is consistent with the 
more intense DDOS Attacks in that period (together with Cellcom/Orange Liberia’s 
4G becoming available from Ap ril 2016):

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
69 
  
iii) This chronology is wholly inconsistent with the DDOS Attacks having impacted 
data users, and then had a knock -on effect on the voice spend of those user s. 
240. As Mr Kitchener KC put it, drawing on his own stripling studies, the narrative underlying 
Mr Nicholson’s report lacked the explanatory power to accommodate the chronology of 
events, particularly in the face of the much more compelling narrative which emerges from 
the contemporaneous documents. I am sa tisfied that the reduction in Lonestar’s A RPU 
occurred in January 2016 because that was when Lonestar opened up its DYO offering to 
HVC s and imposed capping and throttling, slashing its ARPU overnight, and this was the 
reason why it was voice ARPU rather t han data ARPU which fell in early 2016, and why 
voice usage fell while data usage did not.  
241. There are other problems with Lonestar’s approach. Mr Nicholson’s methodology is 
noticeably indirect, rather than looking at what Lonestar’s internal assessment was  of the 
reasons why it was losing revenue per customer relative to Cellcom/Orange Liberia . As 
will be apparent from the chronological summary set out in Section D above, and as would 
be expected, there was extensive analysis within Lonestar of why its HVCs  were reducing 
their average spend, which did not attribute the fall in voice spend to the DDOS Attacks, 
and only identified the DDOS Attacks as impacting data revenue when those attacks 
became much more intense in the second half of 2016. It is as if the court is being asked to 
find that an injured man was run over because there is a higher rate of traffic offences  and 
a lower rate of violent acquisitive crime in the wider region , and to ignore the victim’s “res 
gestae” statement to a passer -by that he was  robbed.  
242. Further, Mr Nicholson’s decision to isolate one unilateral pricing decision by Lonestar (the 
decision to pass on the 1c excise tax in January 2017) when analysing the A RPU swing, 
but not the other significant unilateral decisions taken by Lonestar  which impacted on 
pricing, or what was received in return from pricing, was never satisfactorily explained. 
The different responses by Lonestar and Orange Liberia to the excise tax (one absorbing it

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
70 
 and therefore cutting its pre -tax price, the other passi ng it on) do not appear to be different 
in kind to any of the other occasions on which one party made a price move which was not 
matched by the other for a period of time (in March 2017 the excise tax was withdrawn). 
The January 2017 event do es not appear to differ from any of the other unilateral price 
moves, yet it is treated differently by Mr Nicholson.  
243. There are also very real difficulties with Lonestar’s case as to the causal mechanism by 
which the DDOS Attacks impact ing the user experience of data su bscribers would lead to 
a reduction in the ARPU from voice services. Two causal theories were advanced:  
i) It was Mr Toriola’s evidence that the DDOS Attacks caused Lonestar customers who 
wishe d to use a primary number for both voice and data to reduce their use of both 
services when Lonestar’s data services were impacted by the DDOS Attacks, without 
actually ceasing to be subscribers. However, the only contemporary document 
pointed to by Mr Toriola  as evidence of this phenomenon (a Q4 2016 market 
performance report covering the period from Q3 2015) does not show any change in 
primary or secondary usage during this period. The chart was clearly not a measure 
only of movements within each service provider (as suggested to Mr Thomas in the 
course of cross -examina tion)  but of movements across the market as a whole . 
ii) It was also suggested that, with voice and data being sold (inter alia) in combined 
bundles, the effect of DDOS Attacks on data usage impacted voice usage. I accept 
that, in theory, this is a plausible c ausal mechanism. However, in addition to the 
chronological difficulty, Mr Thomas’ analysis showed that take -up of Lonestar’s 
DYO combined voice -data bundle did not change during the most intense period of 
DDOS Attacks (from July 2016 onwards). In my view, this was because the data 
element in the DYO was very small, essentially being a “taster”, with voice use being 
the principal attraction of the DYO.  While I accept that some voice revenue may well 
have been lost through this mechanism, I am satisfied it wo uld have been very limited.  
iii) Finally, as regards both theories, the suggestion that voice track followed data track 
in the sense that winning HVCs ’ data usage would bring with it their voice usage in 
the Liberian market was difficult to square with the fact  that Cellcom/Orange Liberia 
had been the dominant data provider  for 18 months before October 2015, without 
becoming dominant in voice off the back of that data dominance, and with the 
widespread practice of “multi -SIM-ing” which made the use of separate n etworks 
(and hence numbers) for data and voice commonplace.  On the evidence, by Q4 2016, 
70% of HVCs were multi -SIM users, and by 2018 this was the position for 100% of 
the market.  
244. In addition, Lonestar’s case offers no credible account of the chronological intervals 
between the the limited periods of effective DDOS Attacks (as I have found them to be) 
and the impact on voice revenue. Mr Nicholson’s approach assumes that the DDOS Attacks 
rapidly caused a significant reduction in average voice/revenue spend in January and 
February 2016.  However, the “data to voice” causation case advanced by Lonestar assumed 
a period of unhappiness by combined customers with Lonestar’s data services building up 
to a point when it began to impact the use of Lonestar’s voice network as well. It is 
noteworthy that the DDOS Attacks did not lead to any loss of subscribers until September

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
71 
 2016, once the more intense phase of DDOS Attacks had begun (indeed Lonestar added 
subscribers and took market share from Cellcom/Orange Liberia up to that point).  The 
evidence of the impact on data ARPU suggests that it was really only in the second half of 
2016 that the DDOS Attacks had sustained effects, such that any effect on voice r evenue 
would, on Lonestar’s case, have followed that. Indeed it was Mr Toriola’s evidence that it 
was only after February 2017 that customers had become sufficiently frustrated with the 
DDOS Attacks to reduce their MOU.  
245. The many difficulties in reconciling  Lonestar’s theory that the movement in its relative 
combined voice/data ARPU over the period from October 2015 to February 2017 was the 
result of the DDOS Attacks with:  
i) Lonestar’s contemporaneous analysis;  
ii) the timing of data and voice ARPU movements ; and  
iii) the absence of a sufficiently plausible causal mechanism;  
cannot be overcome by Mr Nicholson’s comparative “macro” analysis of other West 
African mobile telecommunications markets. I was not persuaded that the performances of 
the markets he considered wer e as homogenous as the comparison assumed, so as to make 
Liberia a clear outlier rather than one of a number of individual narratives each reflecting 
the circumstances of and events in that market. In some markets, the incumbent does not 
appear to have had  a historical ARPU advantage, in some it was lost very rapidly and some 
had more than two major operators. In any event it is entirely possible that there were other 
factors, or combinations of factors, at work in Liberia (including the fact that, by Octob er 
2015, Cellcom/Orange Liberia was already clearly the data incumbent, and launched 3G 
and 4G/LTE services significantly in advance of Lonestar) which can explain the particular 
course of events in the Liberian market.  
I2(2) Data ARPU  
246. There was a swing in the data ARPU during the DDOS Attack period of $0.40. Mr Thomas’ 
loss calculation allocated 50% of this swing to the DDOS Attacks, which he said was a 
conservative figure. I am satisfied that it is the appropriate figure to use:  
i) I have already exp lained that I am not persuaded that Mr Nicholson’s attribution of 
70% of the combined voice/data ARPU swing to the DDOS Attacks is reliable: [ 238]-
[244]. 
ii) Cellcom/Orange Liberia w as the data incumbent before the DDOS Attacks, and also 
enjoyed a major advant age in being the first to launch both 3G and 4G/LTE data 
services in Liberia, and in its superior data network and infrastructure.  
iii) Lonestar’s pricing decisions for bundles which included a (small) data allowance, 
which were taken for reasons other than the  DDOS Attacks, would themselves have 
had an adverse effect on Lonestar’s data ARPU, and the April 2016 price review 
involved a significant cut to Lonestar’s PAYG data prices, and marked the start of a 
data price war which adversely impacted data ARPU. I ac cept, however, that some

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
72 
 element of Lonestar’s price reduction for data was a response to the DDOS Attacks, 
particularly from late 2016 (when this linkage is specifically referred to in 
contemporary documents).  
247. The allocation of the data ARPU swing across these various causes is inevitably rough and 
ready. Mr Thomas ’ initial application of 1/3:1/3:1/3 for superior network/technology, price 
decisions an d the DDOS Attacks does not disclose  a reasoned basis for the assumed 
equivalence  of these factors , and doe s not specifically account for the indirect effect of the 
DDOS Attacks on Lonestar’s data pricing. However, I am satisfied that the 50% attribution 
Mr Thomas uses in his final calculation does fairly allow for this, and that this is the 
appropriate figure to use.  
I2(3) Voice ARPU losses  
248. For the reasons I have set out at [ 238] to [244] above, I am unable to accept Lonestar’s case 
as to the existence of an appreciable effect of the DDOS Attacks  on its voice revenue 
beyond that already accounted for within the figure for lost subscribers addressed at I2(1) 
above. However, I accept  that: 
i) there are two documents which emerge late in the story which suggest there may 
well have been some “slow” loss of voice traffic from l ost data users who did not 
become los t subscribers ( albeit they do not provide any basis for quantifying it ); 
ii) the combined bundle provides a possible causal mechanism for lost data subscribers 
to impact voice revenue ; 
iii) it is unlikely that levels of customer  dissatisfaction which were enough to drive 
many customers away would have had absolutely no voice impact at all  on those 
who remained subscribers.  
249. However, the overall tenor of Lonestar’s internal assessments is that the  most significant  
consequence of th e DDOS Attacks was lost data revenue.  In my assessment, it is  
appropriate to remove  the voice ARPU swing which happen ed in the first half of 2016, and 
the effect of the January 2017 decision to pass on the excise tax  in order to arrive at the 
figure for vo ice ARPU swing which is un accounted for . In the time -honoured phrase, doing 
the best that I can on the material available to me, I am satisfied that it would be appropriate 
to attribute 50% of th at remaining voice ARPU swing to the DDOS Attacks. I asked th e 
parties to agree the calculation of the loss of profit figure on that basis.  
250. I received two very different figures:  
i) from Lonestar, a figure for total loss of profit of $5,239,826 (supported by a new set 
of calculations from Mr Nicholson); and  
ii) from Orang e Liberia, a figure for total loss of profit of $3,602,349.  
251. The difference between the two figures turns on the following:  
i) the start date of the voice ARPU swing, which Mr Nicholson has taken as October

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
73 
 2015 when the DDOS Attacks began, and which Orange Li beria has taken as 1 July 
2016; and  
ii) the amount of the voice ARPU swing attributed  to Lonestar’s decision to pass on 
the excise tax, which Mr Nicholson had previously quantified at 40c and  which he  
now suggest s should be quantified at 15c.  
252. As to (i), I am satisfied that this would be  inconsistent with my finding that the DDOS 
Attacks did not cause any impact on voice ARPU before the second half of 2016 and it is 
not the refore open to Lonestar  to seek to revisit that issue . 
253. As to (ii), the figure of 40c was put forward by Mr Nicholson  before and at the trial , and 
agreed to by Mr Thomas. Mr Nicholson was cross -examined on that basis and agreed that 
if the combined ARPU swing before July 2016 was removed, and the sw ing due to the 
decision to pass on the excise tax was also removed, that left a combined voice/ARPU 
swing of 23c (of which voice makes up 4c).  The figure now  put forward  reflects  a change 
in Mr Nicholson’s model . This had  proceeded on the basis of a compar ison between  the 
three months from September to November 2016 with t he three months from March to May 
2017. Mr Nicholson now suggests that the voice ARPU swing should be calculated solely 
from Decemb er 2016, which should  be compared with the six months fro m March to 
August 2017.  
254. In the course of closing  arguments , the issue of how any voice ARPU swing due to the 
DDOS Attacks should be calculated was raised. Mr Singla KC  referred to the fact that Mr 
Thomas has not produced his own calculation  of lost voice A RPU , having reached the view 
that the DDOS Attacks had had no effect o n voice ARPU. Addressing a scenario  in which 
I concluded that there had been some effect  on voice ARPU , but not that calculated by Mr 
Nicholson, I asked:  
“What happens in that situation?  It is not a baseball arbitration, where I have to choose 
one or other salary offering. I have to be satisfied -- if the situation is I end up saying 
there is some voice but I think it is less, do I ask for more submissions or ...? ” 
 
The exchanges which followed were as follows:  
 
“Mr Singla :   I think it can be dealt with through the model.  
 
Foxton J :    Okay, so you adjust inputs, do you?  
 
Mr Singla :   I think so.  
 
Foxton J    As long as I'm not asked to run the model myself.  
 
Mr Singla:  I think it is a case of once you know what  percentage and what 
youconfine to that can be worked  out, and that shouldn't 
controversia l.” 
255. I am not willing to allow Lonestar to depart from the case which was maintained through

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
74 
 the trial, or change the model which was ag reed to by Mr Thomas and which it was accept ed 
would form t he basis of any alternative calculation. Lonestar has accepted (in Freshfields 
Bruckhaus Deringer’s letter of 23 February 2023 ) that the 2c figure put forward by Orange 
Liberia is that which follows “from th e approach adopted by the parties’ quantum experts”. 
It is not appropriate for Mr Nicholson, or Lonestar, to seek to revisit their methodology 
after the draft judgment was circ ulated (cf. Royal & Sun Alliance Insurance Limited v 
Tughans [2022] EWHC 2825 (Comm), [16]).  
I3 Future losses  
256. I have found that the DDOS Attacks caused:  
i) the loss of 90,000 subscribers;  
ii) 50% of the data A RPU losses ; and  
iii) 2c of the voice ARPU swing.  
257. That leaves the issue of how long these losses continued after the end of the DDOS Attack 
period.  
258. Taking loss of subscribers first, it was common ground that subscriber loss would continue 
to April 2020 , and I understand both sets of calculations proceed on this basis . 
259. So far as the ARPU loss is concerned (which involved Lonestar data customers spending 
less than they would otherwise have done on data  and voice ), Mr Thomas’ calculation 
assumes that the effect would have been exhausted by September 2019, wh en the new price 
floor was introduced.  I am not persuaded that the price floor itself would have been a factor 
in ending the significance of the DDOS Attacks on the market for Lonestar’s ARPUs. Its 
effect was to equalise the pricing between Lonestar and Or ange Liberia, but there is no 
reason why that would, of itself, have reversed the prior effects o f the DDOS Attacks  on 
customer behaviour . However, I accept that, by September 2019 , the effects of the DDOS 
Attacks on Lonestar were largely coming to an end (which was broadly the evidence of Mr 
Toriola in his witness st atement : see in particular paragraphs 36(a), 38 and 47 ). I am 
satisfied that the April 2020 end -date for subscriber losses also represents the end date for 
these other losses (it would be surpr ising if it took more time for data and voice spending 
of retained Lonestar customers to recover to the level it would have had, but for DDOS 
Attacks, than for the position with respect to los t subscribers to reach the same position ). 
I4 Loss of profit: conclusion  
260. On the basis of the findings I have made, the loss of profit caused by the DDOS Attacks 
falls to be quantified at $3,602,349.  
261. Lonestar’s argument at times appeared to suggest that  a figure at or around this level was 
inherently too small to be a realistic assessment of the effect of the DDOS Attacks given 
their scale . However:  
i) As I have explained, I am satisfied that the practical effect s of the DDOS Attacks on

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
75 
 users of Lonestar’s netwo rk were much more isolated, and limited, than Lonestar’s 
case theory ass umes . 
ii) I have no basis for concluding that a figure of $3.6m  is somehow “too small”, such 
that it must fail a sense -check on size alone.  In any event, Lonestar’s profit in 2015 
(before the DDOS Attacks became effective) was $1.95m.  Viewed against that figure, 
and given my findings as to the actual impacts and duration of the DDOS Attacks, 
there is nothing about the size of the figure I have arrived at which leads me to 
question whether i t is a fair quantification of Lonestar’s loss.  
iii) By contrast, although routinely described as the product of a conservative analysis, I 
found Mr Nicholson’s figure of just over $46 .7m wholly inconsistent with Lonestar’s 
financial performance in 2015, the dow nward trajectory of its financial performance 
and Lonestar’s own internal assessment s of the effect of the DDOS Attacks . 
I5 Failure to mitigate  
262. Orange Liberia argued that Lonestar’s network capacity and DDOS defences were not fit 
for purpose and that it sh ould have increased cleaning capacity quicker than it did.  I am no t 
persuaded that there is anything in this argument. Indeed, to a significant extent, I suspect 
that Orange Liberia’s “failure to mitigate” argument was advanced only to address the 
possibil ity that the court accepted Lonestar’s case that the DDOS Attacks began having 
very serious effects on Lonestar’s network on a near -continuous basis from October 2015. 
I have rejected that contention. Viewed in the light of the actual effect of the DDOS At tacks, 
and the intermittent nature of those effects, I am not persuaded that Lonestar acted 
unreasonably in its response to the attacks. Nor am I persuaded that it is open to Orange 
Liberia to advance a mitigation argument premised on Lonestar’s failure to  install a higher 
capacity DDOS defence system before the DDOS Attacks began. Seat-belts and crash 
helmets apart (and English law deals with those through the concept of contributory 
negligence: cf. Glanville W illiams, Joint Torts and Contributory Negligence  (1951), 
Ch.11 ), complaints about mitigation involve the steps taken (or not taken) after the tort, and 
I was taken to nothing which suggested that the law of Liberia was any different in this 
respect.  
I6 Unnecessary expenditure  
263. Finally, Lonestar claimed $878,170  in expenditure. This part of the claim was, for 
understandable reasons, only explored briefly at trial , but the absence of any witness able 
to speak to the expenses and a clear audit trail has allowed for  some dispute as to w hether, 
and if so why, these costs were incurred . Taking the individual elements in turn:  
i) The upgrade of MT N Liberia’s Point of Presence infrastructure on 30 May 2016 at a 
cost of $143,685 : There is a n unsigned  CAPEX proposal  of February 2016  approving 
this acquisition which expressl y links at least parts of the expense  to “the mitigation 
efforts for the DDOS attacks of  2015”.  However, the proposal appears to have first 
been put forward before the DDOS Attacks began (having been budgeted for in the 
2015 bus iness plan). I am unable to identify which parts, if any, of this expense were 
caused by the DDOS Attacks, and which were simply the implementation of a pre -

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
76 
 DDOS Attacks project. The claim for this head of expense fails.  
ii) The purchase of the Arbor Networks UK Ltd Anti -DDOS solution on 24 August 2016 
for $368,757 : This expense is supported by a purchaser order of this date and a 
CAPEX approval which states that “persistent DDOS attacks on MTN Liberia Data 
Services have led to Productivity & Revenue losses, Re putational Damage”.  The 
Arbor Cloud service was installed in September 2016. This head of expense is 
sufficiently proved and is recoverable.  
iii) The upgrade of MTN Liberia’s POP infrastructure on 30 August 2016 for $89,650 : 
This appears in a n unsigned  CAPEX proposal which notes that “the mitigation efforts 
for the DDOS attacks of 2015” required the installation of the anti -DDOS 
functionality. It appears to duplicate the first item in certain respects. However, I am 
satisfied that at least $63,243.36 of  this figure relates to anti -DDOS capable Fortigate  
nodes, and I will award that amount.  
iv) The acquisition of the Arbor Networks UK Ltd Availability Protection System on 16 
November 2016 for $275,078 : There is an invoice in this amount from Arbor.  There 
is no dispute that this system was installed, and  it must have been paid for. This figure 
is recoverable.  
J EXEMPLARY DAMAGES  
264. I will first consider  the position of the Individual Defendants.  
265. So far as Mr Kaye is concerned, he has served a sentence of imprisonm ent for his role in 
the DDOS Attacks. The criminal justice process has appropriately served the goal of 
punishing Mr Kaye for his actions, and I do not believe it would be appropriate for an award 
of punitive damages to be made against him in those circums tances.  
266. So far as Mr Marziano is concerned , he was the principal mover in the DDOS Attacks. He 
lied to Cellcom BVI about his involvement when asked to comment on this claim, and has 
avoided participation in these proceedings . He has not, as yet, been subje ct to any form of 
criminal process in respect of his involvement, and the chances of this happening must be 
limited given the interval of time which has now elapsed. He was ultimately motivated by 
his own personal benefit, and clearly did benefit to some d egree, although the extent to 
which the bonuses received by him were increased as a result of the DDOS Attacks is not 
clear on the evidence before me. I am satisfied that an order of punitive damages in the 
amount of US$170,000  (the amount of the bonus pai d to him after Cellcom BVI received 
the final Earn Out Payment in December 2016 ) is appropriate . 
267. I am not persuaded that it would be appropriate to award punitive damages against Mr 
Polani. He was significantly junior to Mr Marziano, had a much more limited role, and I 
have seen no evidence that he obtained a significant financial benefit from his involvement 
with the DDOS Attacks.  
268. I am not persuaded that it would be appropriate to order punitive damages against Orange 
Liberia. The vicarious nature of  its liability is  a very relevant factor in this respect, as is the 
essentially commercial nature of the dispute  and the financial nature of the harm inflicted

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
77 
 on Lonestar . Having regard to the order for compensatory damages made against it, and the 
paymen ts it made to Cellcom BVI the recovery of which now looks highly questionable, I 
am not persuaded that it has made any net benefit from  the DDOS Attacks, particularly 
when regard is had to the management time which this litigation will have consumed, and 
the inevitability of uncompensated costs (whatever costs order might be made).  
269. For essentially similar reasons, I do not believe an order for punitive damages is appropriate 
against Cellcom BVI. It will now face a claim from Orange Liberia under the warrant ies in 
the S PA, as well as the damages award made in this judgment. It is likely to face real 
difficulties in recovering the amounts it has paid to Mr Marziano.  
K CONTRIBUTION  
270. Finally, Orange Liberia seeks orders for 100% contribution from Cellcom BVI and the 
Individual Defendants under the Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978. Section 2(1) of 
that Act provides that the amount of contribution shall be “such sum as may be found by 
the court to be just and equitable having regard to that person’s respo nsibility for the 
damage in question”. In determining that amount, the case law suggests that I should have 
regard to:  
i) the causative potency of the various defendants ’ actions ; 
ii) their respective moral blameworthiness (whether or not the blameworthy acts cau sed 
the damage);  
iii) organisational responsibility;  and 
iv) other factors which have a “sufficient relationship” to the damage in question;  
(Dubai Aluminium Co Ltd v Salaam [2003] 2 AC 366, [72]; Brian Warwicker Partnership 
Plc v HOL International Ltd [2005] EWCA Civ 962, [37] -[38], [45], [51]; Parkman 
Consulting Engineers v Cumbrian Industrials Ltd [2001] EWCA Civ 1621, [108]).  
271. In relation to the Individual Defendants, I am satisfied that the appropriate level of 
contribution should be 100% . They were entirely res ponsible for the acts which caused the 
loss, and are the only parties who acted in a morally blameworthy way. I do not believe this 
order involves any risk of Orange Liberia retaining an ultimate benefit from the wrongful 
acts, given the factors identified  in [262] above, and the fact that it has made the Earn Out 
Payments.  
272. As regards Cellcom BVI, I am going to put Orange Liber ia’s contractual rights  against 
Cellcom BVI on one side. No claims under the S PA or TSA were pleaded, and I heard no 
argument upon t hem. However, it follows that this order for contribution is not in any way 
intended to limit Orange Liberia’s contractual rights against Cellcom BVI.  
273. On that basis, and given the absence of any personal fault by Orange Liberia or Cellcom 
BVI, both of whom  have been found liable on a vicarious basis for the acts of Mr Marziano, 
I am satisfied that the order for contribution should be 50%: Viasystems (Tyneside) Ltd v 
Thermal Transfer (Northern) Ltd [2005] EWCA 1151, [2006] QB 510, [84] -[85].

THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FOXTON  
Approved Judgment  Lonestar Communications Corporation LLC  
v Orange Liberia, Inc  
 
78 
 L CONCLUSION  
274. On the basis set out above, it follows that:  
i) Lonestar is entitled to judgment against each of the Individual Defendants, Orange 
Liberia and Cellcom  BVI in the sum of $3,602,349  lost profits and $707,738.36 
unnecessary expenditure, and further entitled to puni tive damages of $170,000 
against Mr Marziano.  
ii) Orange Liberia is entitled to 100% contribution from each of the Individual 
Defendants, and 50% contribution from Cellcom BVI.  
275. I would like to conclude by expressing my gratitude to the legal representatives fo r all their 
hard work, and in particular for their successful efforts to present a complex case using 
written opening and closing submissions of manageable proportions.