Neutral Citation Number: [2021] EWHC 671 (Ch)  
 
Case No: BL-2019 -BRS -000028  
IN THE HIGH COUR T OF JUSTICE  
BUSINESS AND PROPERTY COURTS IN BRISTOL  
INSOLVENCY AND COMPANIES LIST (ChD)  
 
Bristol Civil Justice Centre  
2 Redcliff Street, Bristol, BS1 6GR  
 
Date: 25/03/20 21 
 
Before  : 
 
HHJ PAUL MATTHEWS  
(sitting as a Judge of the High Court)  
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Between :  
 
 (1) NIHAL MOHAMMED KAMAL BRAKE  
(2) ANDREW YOUNG BRAKE  Claimants  
 - and -  
 (1) GEOFFREY WILLIAM GUY  
(2) THE CHEDINGTON COURT ESTATE 
LIMI TED  
(3) AXNO LLER EVENTS LIMITED  Defendants  
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Daisy Brown  (instructed by Porter Dodson LLP ) for the Claimants  
Andrew Sutcliffe QC and William Day (instructed by  Stewarts Law LL P) for t he 
Defendants  
 
Hearing dates: 23 -27 November 2020  
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Approved Judgment  
I direct that pursuant to CPR PD 39A para 6.1 no official shorthand note shall be taken of this 
Judgment and that copies of this version a s handed down may be treated as authentic.  
 
 
.............................

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
2 
 Covid -19 Protocol: This judgment  was handed down by the judge remotely by circulation to the 
parties’ representatives by email and release to BAILII on the date shown at 10:30 am. 
HHJ Paul Matthews :   
INTR ODUCTION  
General  
1. This is my judgment on the  trial of part of the claim , by claim f orm issued on 2 
September 2 019 for a final injunc tion and damages in respect of the alleged accessing, 
retention and deployment by the defendant s of emails said to be private and 
confidential to the claimants and held  within three ema il accounts. It is a t rial of part 
of the claim because the full claim would have taken between 10 and 15 days to try, 
and so it was decided to try all the issues exc ept the so -called “iniquity” defence 
advanced by the defendants. It was a lso decided to tr y, as a preliminary is sue, the 
question whether the “iniquity defence” was available to the defendants as a matter of 
law. If the results of this part of the trial an d of the preliminary issue show that it is 
necessary to go on to try the “iniquity defence ”, then the time taken  by this part of the 
trial and the preliminary issue will not have been wasted, because these always 
needed to be decided. But if they show  that the trial of the remainder is not necessary, 
considerable time and money  will have been sa ved.  
2. Originally, the  trial was intended to be conducted in person, because it was listed at a 
time when no “lockdown” was in place because of the Covid 19 pandemic.  However, 
a further lockdown was imposed before the trial date, and I rec onsidered the matt er. 
Beca use of the ne w lockdown, the significant increase in the number of infections in 
the Bristol area, and the fact that Dr Guy (the first defendant) was shieldi ng after a 
recent serious medical operation, I decided that the hearing  would instead be he ld 
remot ely. It was t herefore con ducted using the Zoom videoconferencing platform 
(curated by a third party rather than the court, because judicial laptops are not a ble to 
run Zoom), between 23 and 26 November 2020 , although written closi ng submissions 
meant that the trial was  not complete until 14 December 2020 . As happened at an 
earlier trial between these pa rties, the hearing  was liv e-streamed over the web, so 
ensuring public participation. Unlike that earlier trial, on this occasion th e claimants, 
their lawyers and their wi tnesses (with one exception) all came to a single location 
namely, the offices  of the claimants’ solicitors. Thi s ensured both that the claimant s 
themselves had access to high quality broadband video (which was sadly lacking at 
the previous trial) and that  the claimant s’ lawyers were better able to liaise with their 
clients and with  the wit nesses, and to provide cop ies of the bundles.  
3. This claim f orms a discrete part of wider ranging litigation between the claimants on  
the one hand and the defendants on the  other. There are (or have been) a number of 
other claims between the parties.  This is  only the second of them t o come to trial. 
There are other s waiting in the wings. The background to the litigation in general, and 
therefore to this claim in particular, is complex and not easily summarised. 
Nevertheless it is necessary to paint a broad pi cture of the context in wh ich this claim 
arises, before co nsidering the elements of the claim and the evidence in relation to it 
in detail. I borrow parts of the followin g summary from summaries in other judgments 
I have given involving these parti es.

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
3 
 Back ground  
4. In September 2004, the first claimant (then Mrs D’A rcy, but whom I shall call by her 
current name, Mrs Brake) acquired West Axnoller Farm (“the Farm”), near 
Beamin ster in Dorset, from local landowners, the Vickery family (who continued to 
have subst antial landholdings locally). This pr operty included a sub stantial dwelling -
house known subsequently as Axnoller House. In 2006 Mrs  Brake began to operate a 
holiday letti ng business at the Farm, subsequently joined in partnership in 2008 by her 
husband, th e second claimant (“Mr Brake”).  Just outside the southern boundary of the 
Farm, on t he other side of the private lane lea ding to th e Farm, lies another , smaller  
residenti al property known as West Axnoller Cottage (the “cottage ”).  
5. In July 2002 a Mr  and M rs White  had purchased the cottage from the V ickery family 
and were living there when Mrs Brake bought the Farm. Mrs Brake borrowed m oney 
from bankers Adam & Co in 2006, se cured by a first legal charge on the Farm. The 
financial crisis of 2008 made i t impo ssible t o obtain further bank finance to expa nd 
the business  being carried on at the Farm. The claim ants therefore looked for an 
outside investor.  
6. In February 2010 the claimants entered into a partnership with a limited partnership 
called Patley Woo d Farm LLP (“PW F”), whose principal was Mrs Lorraine  Brehme 
(“Mrs Brehme”). The new partnership (known as “Stay in Style”) was to carry on the 
business of providing luxurious wee kend and other breaks, and hosting events such as 
weddings. The claim ants cont ributed  the Far m as partnership property, although i t 
remained cha rged to Adam & Co to secure existing borrowings. With funds 
contributed b y Mrs Brehme, on 8 March 2010 the partn ership acquired the cottage, 
the legal title to which was transferred to the claimants and Mr s Brehme jointly, who 
were registered  as proprietor s. At first the cottage was used as accommodation for a 
housekeeper and t hen for a personal assistant (Simon Win dus) and his family. After 
they left in 2012 it was used (inter alia) for the claim ants to st ay in when the main 
house was let.  
7. Differences aro se between the claim ants on the one hand and PWF on the other, as 
partner s in Stay in Style. In accordance with the partnership agreement, t hese were 
referred to arbitration, which ended on 21 June 2013 with an award in favour of PWF, 
and the dissolut ion o f the partnership. Following a f ailure to pay orders made against 
them fo r costs in the arbitration, the claim ants were adjudicated bankrupt on 12 May 
2015. Mr Duncan Swift was appointed trustee in bankruptcy with another person,  who 
later retired and was not replaced. The partnership itself subsequently went into 
administratio n (in 2016), and the n into liquidat ion (in 2017).  
8. In October 2014 Adam & Co, the bank which had lent money to Mrs Brake against 
the security of the Farm, appointed receivers under th e Law of Property Act 1925. 
After marketing the property, the  LPA receive rs sold it in July 2 015 to a newly 
incorporated company, Sarafina Proper ties Limited  (“Sarafina ”), said to be a 
corporate vehicle for the Hon Saffron Foster (“Mrs Foster”), a daughter  of Lord 
Vestey, as well as a friend of  Mrs Brake .  
9. In February 2017 Mrs Foster sold t he company to Th e Chedi ngton Co urt Esta te Ltd 
(“Chedington”, the sec ond defendant), and its name was changed to Axnoller Events 
Limited (“AEL”). It is the third defendant  in this claim. Chedington is an investment

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
4 
 vehicle for Dr Geoffrey Guy (“Dr Guy”, the  first defendant ). Mr and Mrs Brake w ere 
employed to continue to run the wedding and rental accommodation business as 
before. Relations between the parties broke down, an d on 8 November 2018 notice 
was given of the termination of their employment. T his led to proceedings i n the 
employmen t tribunal against Chedington and oth ers by each of the claimant s (“the 
Employment Claims”), and proceedings in the High Court by AEL agai nst the 
applicants to recover possession of the Farm (“the Possession Claim”).  
10. Following this, in Janu ary 201 9, Mr Sw ift as trustee in bankruptcy entered into a 
transaction with t he liquidators of the partnership in relation to the cottage, to acquire 
the liquidators’ rights in it. Chedington entered into back to back transactions w ith Mr 
Swift in order to acquire those rights. Th e Brake s allege  that Chedington and Mr 
Swift acted c ollusively, implementing “unlawful arrangements to create the false 
appearan ce that Chedington had acquired title to the cottage”. Chedington 
subsequently took possession of the cottage, the Bra kes say un lawfull y. They 
therefore commenced eviction proceedi ngs against Chedington (“the Eviction 
Claim”). So the position on the ground  currently is that the claim ants are in 
occupation of the house, but seek posse ssion of the cottage, whereas the second 
defendant  is in oc cupatio n of the  cottage, and the third defendant seeks possession of 
the house. Trials of these two possession claims are currently listed for April and May 
2021.  
11. In addition, on 12 February 2019 the Brakes commenced insolvency  proceedings (the 
“Liquidation Applicat ion” and t he “Ban kruptcy Application”) against both the 
liquid ators of the partnership and their trustee in bankruptcy. The first purpose of 
these insolvency proceedings was to unwind the disputed transactions. The se cond 
purpose was (as against the truste e) to esta blish t hat the Brakes’ pre -existing interests 
in the  cottage and the adjacent parcels had revested  in them and Mrs Brake 
respectively on 12 May 2018 under the Insolvency Act 1986, section 283A, on the 
basis that they were the Brakes’ sole or prin cipal resi dence a t the da te of bankruptcy, 
and Mr Swift had ta ken no steps to realise them three years later . In April 2019, by 
consent, Chedington was joined as second respondent to the proceedings against Mr 
Swift, because it claimed to be a successor in  title to him. In  June 20 19 Mr Jarvis QC 
made two order s by cons ent, one  removing Mr Swift from office, and another 
appointing his successors.  
12. In January 2020 Chedington applied to strike out the p roceedings agai nst the 
liquidators and mo st of t hose again st Mr Swift and i tself, on the basis  that the Brakes 
lacked  standing to bring them. I  heard those applicatio ns in early March 2020, and 
acceded to them. I struck out the whole of the Liquidation App lication ([2020 ] EW HC 
538 (Ch)), and most  of the  Bankruptc y Application ([2 020] EW HC 537 (Ch)) , for 
lack of standing.  An appeal against my deci sion in the Liquidation  Application was 
dismissed by the Court of Appeal. An appeal against my decision in the Ba nkruptcy 
Applic ation was however allowed,  so tha t that app lication is yet t o be tr ied (see 
[2020] EWCA Civ 1491 for both appeal s). But, as  at March 2020, the only sig nificant 
matter left from the Liquidation and Bankruptcy Applications  to be tried in May  of 
that year, against the former trustee and Chedington, was the  revesting issue under  
section 283A.   
13. It is relevant to note that, on 4 May 202 0, the claimant s applied  by notice in relation 
to that section 283A claim  for me to recuse myself from trying it . I heard that

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
5 
 application on 7 May and gave judgment on 11 May 2 020, refusing the appl ication: 
see [2020] EWHC 1156 (Ch) , [2020] BPIR 1254 . Permission to appeal  agains t my 
decision was refused by the Court of Appeal.  So the section 283A  claim  was tried, 
and I gave judgment in Ju ly 2020, in favour of Chedington ( [2020] EWHC 1810 (Ch), 
[2020] 4 WLR 113). An a pplication for permission to appeal  was re fused by the Court 
of Appeal on 30 October 2020.  
THE PRESENT CLAIM  
Procedure  
14. As I have said, the claim form in this claim was issued on 2 September 2019. The 
claim form made c laims for a final injunction and da mage s based on  causes of action 
in breach of c onfidence, misu se of p rivate information, procuring a breach of contract, 
and compensation under article 82 of the (EU) General Data Protection Regulation . 
Particulars  of clai m were attached , seeking similar re lief. On the same day , an 
application w as issu ed for an interim inju nction to restrain  the defendants from 
dealing with the documents in the email accounts  to which I have referred . It is 
important to be clear that at thi s stage the claimants did not have  a complete copy of 
the enquiries accou nt and there had been no  agree d review by the parties of the 
document s contained in that account for the purpose of establishing what was and was 
not private and /or confidential.  
15. On 2 8 November 2019 Mr John Jarvis QC,  sitting as a depu ty High Court judge, upon 
certain undertakings b y the claimants, granted an interim injunction restraining the 
defendants until final determination of the claim or further order from disclosing or 
publish ing certain documents within the e mail account ident ified by its then add ress, 
enquiries@axnoller.co.uk , and to delete private emails. The judge also ordered by 
consent that the defendants provide the claiman ts with a full copy of the account  and 
directed a pr ocedure designed to i dentify  private documents i n that account, together 
with ancillary directions .  
16. The relevant provisions  of the order  are as follows:  
“3. The Guy Parties, until final determination of the Documents Claim or 
further order, w hether b y themselves, thei r directors, partners , emplo yees, 
agen ts or othe rwise, shall not further disclose or publish or cause the 
disclosure or publication or make any further use of any documents within the  
Account  (the ‘Injunction ’). 
4. From 4 PM on Th ursday, 21 J anuary 2020, the  Injunction  shall not a pply 
save in respect of doc uments within the  Account identified by the Brakes as 
private pursuant to paragraph 14 below.  
5. The Injunction shall not apply in respect of the  Guy Parties ’ use of the 
bundles prepared for  the hearing for t he Documents Applicat ion and  the LPP 
Application  (‘the Hearing Bundles ’) in order to:  
i. Plead the Defence to the Do cuments Claim ; and

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
6 
 ii. Draft the Appellant s’ Notice , grounds of appeal and skeleton 
argument and prepare the b undles to se ek permission to a ppeal from 
the Court of Appe al in respect of the  Documents Appli cation and the  
LPP Application  (and to argue such appeal in the event permission to 
appeal is granted).  
6. This Injunction does not prevent the court or tribunal seised in an y of the 
following  proceedings from mak ing an order for disclosure  of insp ection of 
documents in the  Account:  
i. The Insolvency Proceedings,  
ii. The Documents Claim , 
iii. The claims in the employment tribu nal proceedings with claim 
numbers 140 0598/2019 and  1400597/2019,  
iv. The proceedings rela ting to  West Axnoller Farm with claim number 
E00YE350, 
v. The proceedings relating to  West Axnoller  Cottage with claim 
number F00YE085. 
[ … ] 
13. By 4 PM on 9 Decembe r 2019, the Guy Parties  will provide th e Brakes  
with a full copy of t he Account.  
14. By 4 PM on  Tuesday , 21 January 2 020, the Brakes will pro vide the  Guy 
Parties  with an itemised list of the documents in the  Account claime d by the  
Brakes to be private.  
15. By 4 PM on Thursday, 20 February 2020,  the Guy Parties will conduct a 
review and confirm to the Brakes  in respect of  each document identified at 
paragraph 14  above whether they:  
i. agree that their copies of the docu ment should be destroyed; or  
ii. do not  agree that their copies of the documen t should be destroyed.  
16. By 4 PM on Thursday,  27 Februar y 2020 , the Guy Part ies will destroy all 
copies in their possession of documents identified pursuant to paragraph 15 (i) 
above and the  Brakes shall destroy all copies in their possession of documents  
from the  Account ot her than t hose identified pursu ant to paragr aph 14 above.  
17. The Brakes  are at liberty from Friday 21 February 2020  to apply to the  
Court for an order that t he Guy Parties destroy all copies of an y do cuments 
falling into paragraph 15 (ii) above. Su ch application sha ll be: 
i. made no lat er than  4 PM on Friday, 28 February 2020; and

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
7 
 ii. supported by a witness statement explaining, for each document in 
respect of which t he Brakes  seek relief, the basis  on which a claim of 
misuse of private information is maintained.  
18. For the avoidance of  doubt,  the Guy Parties are  entitled to refuse to destroy 
a document if it falls within the scope of categories of do cumen ts set out at 
paragraphs 5 and 6 above. ” 
17. In relation to paragraph 16 of the order, I should say  that, in corresponden ce between 
the pa rties’ solic itors in April 2020, it was agreed that no destruction of documents  
would take place pending trial, but that no formal variation to the order need be made . 
So, as I understand the matter, no de struction ha s yet taken place  on either side . 
18. There was also pro vision fo r the preparation , on joint instructions , by Matthew 
Black band of Grant Thornton Digital Fore nsic Experts Services of a forensic IT report 
dated  5 March 2020. This report related to a particular aspect of the a ccount , namely 
to seek to explain the  discrepa ncies between two archived versions of the ac count, one 
made  by Allen Computing Services  and the other by Labyrinth Computers Ltd . The 
completed  report was in the papers before me at the trial, although Mr  Black band was 
not called to give oral evi dence 
19. The judgment of the judge leading to the order of which I  have just set out par t, was 
lengthy and detailed. At this stage, it is only necessary to record that , in paragrap h 35 
of his jud gment, Mr J arvis QC said:  
“I must  remind myself that this stage that I am  dealing with an interim 
application, and that it is in appropriate for me at  this stage to make findings of 
fact.”  
In his judgment on costs in r elation to this judgment , on 7 December  2019, the judge 
repeated the point : 
“I made i t very plain that the findings wh ich I m ade were interim only and could 
not in any sense be see n as final.”  
20. For w hat it is worth, I made similar comments in my judgment on  the application for 
security for cos ts in this clai m (to which I shall come) , on 11 Ju ne 2020 ( [2020] 
EWHC 1 484 (Ch) ):  
“62. Having considered all the material placed before me, and in the light of the 
comments of Mr Jarvis QC which I have quoted, I am qu ite satisfied that his 
judgment was pur ely interlocutory, and  made n o final findings of  fact. All that the 
judge decid ed was whether on the material before him he should make the interim 
orders sought. …”  
21. I say this only beca use in paragraph 33 of the clai mants’ opening submissions in this 
case the claimant s say that at th e injunc tion hearin g “the judge mad e the following  
findin gs”, and then a number of matters are set out. Similarly, in paragraphs 3, 9 an d 
20 of the closing s ubmissions on behalf of the cla imants it is said that the judge at tha t 
hearing made certain  findin gs. If t his was intende d to assert that these are finding s 
which are binding on me, then the short answer is that they are not. The judg e did not

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
8 
 hear the wi tnesses give evidence subject t o cross -examination, and did not have t he 
advan tage of a full trial bundle comp iled after (inter alia) disclosure had been gi ven 
by both sides , whereas I did. As I have already made cl ear, th e judge himself did not  
think that  he was  making final findings a t all, and nor did I in the security fo r costs 
application. If on the o ther hand this was intended to s ay that the jud ge made  findings 
for the purposes of the interim injunction , then that ma y be rig ht (though it i nvolves a 
differen t use of the word ‘findi ngs’), but before me that is irrelevant . I regret to say 
therefore that I do not understand why I was p ressed with thi s mater ial. 
22. In the meantime, o n 25 March 2020, the defendant s applied by notice f or security for 
their costs of this claim.  I heard that a pplication on 1 June 2020, and gave jud gment 
(refusing to grant security) on 11 June 2020: see [2020]  EWHC 1484  (Ch). There w as 
no appeal from  my decision.  On 9 July 2020, the claimants applied  for summary 
judgment in this claim, seeking a final injunction  in respect of their private emails. At 
first this was ordered to be li sted for hea ring for one  day. Su bsequently, how ever, o n 
31 July 2020, I ordered that the hearing of this application be listed for hearin g 
together with the trial of the iniquity defenc e. This facilitated the hearing of the 
prelimi nary issue and the non -iniquity trial , as described earli er. 
23. As I said a t the b eginn ing of this judgment, t he prese nt claim concerns the contents of 
three email accounts, which at the material time had the emai l addresses 
enqu iries@axnoller.co.u k, alo@axnoller.co.uk , and andy@axnoller.co.uk . The most 
important of these is the first , which I shall refer to as the “enquir ies account ”, though 
I shall have to refer to t he others as well . 
Fact -Finding  
24. In my e arlier j udgment on the trial of the revesting issue, I  set out some aspects of t he 
fact-finding process  which English civil judges go through. Given that that is 
availabl e in my earlier judgment  ([2020] EWHC 1810 (Ch) , [2020] 4 WLR 11 3, [28]-
[35]), and the  parties will be familiar with it, I will not set it out again, although the 
process is of cours e the same. However, I wil l specifi cally repeat w hat I said about 
one poin t: 
“31. Thirdly, in comm ercial cases where there are many docume nts available, and 
witnesses give evidence as to what happened based on their memories, which 
may be faulty, civil jud ges nowadays often prefer to rely o n the document s in the 
case, as being m ore objective: see Gestm in SGPS SPA v Credit Suisse (UK) Ltd  
[2013] EWHC 3560 ( Comm), [22]. Oral evidence and cross -examination are 
howe ver still important. They enable proper scruti ny of the documents,  and they 
also permit the jud ge to gauge the personali ty and motivations of wi tness es. 
32. The relevant facts in this case go back ab out fif teen years. The present case is 
at least partly a commercial case, and there are sufficient writ ten records, letters, 
emai ls and so  on as to make  the Gestmin  approach rel evant to this case. I wi ll 
therefore give appropriate weight to both the docume ntary e vidence and the oral 
evidence, bearing in mind bot h the fallibility of memory and the relative 
objectivity of the written evidence available.”  
The material facts in the c ase before me now do not  go back quite so far as in that 
case, b ut in my judgme nt I sh ould take the same approach here.  I remind myself that

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
9 
 CPR PD 32, para 27.2 provides that documents in the agreed bundle a re admiss ible 
evidence, unless the court otherwi se orders or a party objects.  
Witnesses  
25. I hear d oral evidence fr om the following witnesses: the first claimant, Stephe n Ryde -
Well er, Simon Wi ndus, Andrew Allen, Simon Cattell, Carl Pearce, a ll for the 
claimants, and R ussell Bowyer, Geoffrey Guy,  and Ha rry Spendlove, for the 
defendants. I record here t hat, although the Hon Saffron Foster plays a n important  
part in this sto ry, and indeed made a witness statement at an earlier interlocutory 
stage, she provided no evidence  for the trial and was not t endered  for cross -
examination. Similarly, Rebecca Holt pl ayed a smaller , but still significant , part. But 
she provid ed no evidence either (not even a wit ness statement). To my mind, these 
were curious an d unexplained omissions. I give here my general impress ions of  each 
witness that was called.  
26. The first claimant,  Nihal (“Alo”) B rake, was also a witness in an earlier tr ial before  
me, between some of the sam e parties , which dealt with the so-called ‘revest ing’ issue 
under section 283A of the Insolvency Act 198 6. In v iew of comments that have been 
made (on both sides ) in closing sub missions, I should make clear that I have  not 
sought , in assessing Mrs Brake ’s evidence in th is trial , to apply  any impression gai ned 
from seeing and hea ring Mrs Brake  in that earlier t rial, which was a different case, 
and when in any event c onditions were  sub-optimal. I am not sure whether  it was 
being urged on me that I should have r egard to my views of Mrs Brake ’s evidence in 
the earlier trial, but I ta ke this opportun ity to state tha t I hav e reached my views of 
Mrs Brake’s evidence in the present case solely on the basis of the evidence that she  
gave in this case. In my judgment , in all the circumstances , it would not be right to do 
otherwise. My assess ment of her evidence is accordin gly as follows.  
27. Mrs Brake was fluent, quick and self -confident. She had  an impressive command of  
all the documents , conversations  and events that favour ed he r case. But she also made 
speeches, exaggera ted, split hairs, often  indulged in legal argument inst ead of 
answering questions, and referred to the evidence of others rath er than her own. She 
had to retract a numbe r of answers wh en subsequently confron ted w ith relevant 
documents. She also gav e “trick y” answers to straightf orward questions. One example 
comes fro m the morning of the second day, where, after an e xchange betwee n her and 
counsel for the  defendants, I int ervened and sai d:  
“I am sorry, Mrs Br ake, do I understand your evidence correc tly? Whe n you 
were asked, ‘you got an email from Moore Blatch’?  And yo u said ‘no, I never 
got an email from Moore Blatch ’, what you me ant was ‘I never got an e mail 
addressed dir ectly to me fro m Moore Blatch even tho ugh t hey copied me into 
it’?” 
To this, Mrs Brake replied “Yes”.  
28. At othe r times, she blustered, as when it was suggested that her solicitors would not 
have sent in a complaint  to the Information Commissioner ’s Office without her 
having previously reviewed the text (which she accepted was wrong):

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
10 
 “Mr Sutc liffe, I have given you  my evidence. I have not signed this do cument. 
It is the first time – I was surprised to see it. I have  not really – you know, so I 
am really sorry, I have n ot got any more to say except that I know A EL does 
not have its own servers so I would never have w ritten that. ” 
Moreover, f aced wi th diff icult questions, she frequently fell back on alleged inabili ty 
to remember , quite at odds with the impressive recall that she othe rwise dis played . I 
am afraid that as a whole I distrust ed her evidence, except where it  was corrobo rated 
from an indepe ndent s ource. Where her evidence conflicted with that of Dr Guy,  or 
Mr Spendlove,  I preferred that of Dr Guy  or Mr Spendlove (as the case might be ). 
29. Mr Ryde -Weller acted as solicitor f or the vend or of Sarafina , the Hon Mrs Saffr on 
Foster. He gave his evidence straight forwardly and was transparently  honest. I accept 
most of his evidence, as far as it went.  But his evidence was limited  in scope , and I 
think some of it was mista ken. He had not for exa mple met Dr Guy, nor  spoken to 
him abou t the transaction.  His information came from others, but principally Mrs 
Brake.  
30. Mr Windus wo rked with  Mrs Brake o n two sep arate occasions, firstly during the 
subsistence of the partnership with Patley Wood Farm, and s econdly once Mrs Foster 
had sold  Sarafi na to Dr Guy’s company, and it changed its  name to AEL . Mrs Brake 
called him “one of my clos est friends”. He was a cautious , but friendly and honest 
witne ss, prepared to accept c orrection where he was shown to be wrong. On the 
whole,  I acce pt his evidence.  
31. Mr Allen work ed with Mrs  Brake as her IT provider from about the end of 2012. He 
was a bus inesslike and precise witness w ho knew both his subject and hi s mind. But 
he was also partisan, and tilted hi s oral evidence to favour Ms Bra ke. He changed his 
evidence on importa nt issues i n order to do so. I am afraid that I regard much of his 
evidence w ith suspicion.  
32. Mr Cattell was i nvolved as an IT adviser for Ms  Brake for a short time in 2011. He 
was a caref ul and knowledgeable witness, wh o would  not be drawn further than he 
wanted to go . His evidence was accordingly rather limited. To that (lim ited) e xtent, I 
gener ally accept his e vidence.  
33. Mr Pearce was a forens ic IT consultant, retain ed by Ms Brake during t he litigation, to 
look at and re port on  data recovered from various el ectronic de vices. He was a 
knowledgeable, exact and transparently hone st witn ess of fact. He accepted correction 
where due. He was an impre ssive  witness, with no a xe to grind. To the ext ent that his 
evidence conflicted  with t hat of Mr Allen or Mr Cattell, I prefer his evidence.  
34. Mr Bowyer, finance director  of the second defendan t, was a str aightforw ard and 
honest witness, who stuck to what he kne w in cross -examination. I accept what he 
said as truthful.  
35. Dr Guy, the owner of  the second defendant a nd ultimate own er of the third defendant, 
was a polite, very precise and businesslike  witness. He answered  without hesitation, 
whether the answer favoured  his case or no t. He lim ited himself to what  he knew or 
had reason to believe. I accept him as a witness of truth, up on whom cross -
examination made no impact.

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
11 
 36. Mr Spendlove, a soli citor for th e defend ants, gave evidence  about the documents the 
subject of th e disput e, having been i ntimately concerned in the reviews that were 
carried ou t pursuant to the order of Mr Jarvis  QC. I accept that he was  a truthful 
witness who  was trying to assist the co urt. As I have sa id, where  his ev idence and that 
of Mrs Brake con flict on the question of  the documents , I pr efer his evidence to hers.  
Fact s found 
Technical terms  
37. This case concerns legal relationships, rights and duties in relation to  email services. 
There are a  number o f technical terms which are commonly used in relation to suc h 
services . It is therefore desi rable that I set out briefly what I  understand those 
technical terms to mean, so as to make cle ar the premises upon which this judgment is 
based. A lthough there was  no expert evidence given at this trial, significant (and 
largely conc ordant) factual eviden ce, including descriptions of how e mail systems 
work,  were given by three professional witnesse s working in the field of IT (Me ssrs 
Cattell, All en and Pear ce). I em phasise that this was not opinion evidence. It is like 
the ‘tutorial ’ evidence that judges a re often t reated to in relation  to, say, how an 
unfamiliar  market operates: see eg Darby Properties Ltd v Lloyds Bank plc  [2016] 
EWHC 2494 (Ch) , [27], [45].   
38. In addition, lik e many oth ers, I have long been us ing email services myself (s ince 
approximately 1 996 in my case), both in the public  and the private sector. Obviously, 
I am n ot an IT expert, and nor am I giving evidence to myself. Nevertheless,  in the 
same way that a jud ge who hol ds a driving licence and  has experience of driving a  car 
may take that e xperience into account in deciding (say) a running down action, I am 
of the v iew that in ap proaching this case  I may take into acc ount my e veryday 
experiences and understanding of using email systems over 25 yea rs. The following  
views t herefore are the res ult of the factual evid ence in this  case, overlaid on my own 
expe rience and understanding, which I set out for the sake of tr ansparenc y. 
39. First of a ll, ‘emails’ are messages from one pers on to an other cont aining data in 
electroni c (demat erialised) form, whi ch can be made visible by being sho wn o n the 
screen of an electro nic device or by being printed o ut onto paper or other mater ial 
form.  An electroni c ‘mailbox’ is a storage location for e mails in  their ele ctronic form. 
This mailb ox can b e hosted by an IT pr ovider on its computer server (and acce ssed 
remotely by the user) , or s elf-hosted by the user on his or her own computer. An email 
‘account’ consis ts of a mailbo x and rel ated services provided by a ‘host’, in relation to 
a particu lar associ ated ‘domain’, a lthough the mail box and services can be  provided 
by the use r him- or he rself w ithout the need for a h ost. But there will still need t o be a 
‘domain ’ involved.  
40. A ‘domain’ is a limited part of cyberspace whose control is giv en to a particular  
person for a mo re or le ss limit ed time  for a registrat ion fee . It has to be renewed at 
periodic intervals  (with further fees) , otherwise it becomes available to o thers. It has 
some similarity (in the com merc ial sect or, at least) with the concept  of a trademark in 
intelle ctual property. Indeed, famous tra demar ks are often used as domain names. It is 
registered with  an inte rnationall y recognised registra r (eg Nomin et), who will have a 
system for dealing wit h applicatio ns for such domains, and also for resolving disputes 
concernin g domain names. Sometimes th e reg istered controller of the domain is

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
12 
 referred to as the ‘ owner’ o f it. In t he sense that the con cept of the  ‘domain’ consists 
of rights having a value , this is un controv ersial. When we speak o f ‘ownership’ of a 
thing, tangib le or intangible , in English law, we u sually mean to refer to ownership of 
a bundle of rig hts in t hat thing.  Indeed, the European  Court of H uman Rights has held 
that a domain can be ‘possess ions’ f or the purposes of arti cle 1 of protocol 1 of the 
European Convention on Human Righ ts: Paeff gen GmbH v Germany , Nos 25379/04, 
21688/05, 21722/05 , and 21 770/05, 18  September 2007.  
41. A ‘d omain name’  is a way of identifying such a domain and distinguishi ng it f rom 
others. (Hence the utility of a registration proc ess.) In practice, a domain na me is use d 
as the basis for identifying a website or group of  website s, togethe r with related email 
addresses. But so metimes it is used as the basis for i dentifying j ust an email address 
or group of addresses, where the contro ller of the domain does not op erate any  
websites. A domain name will have a ‘top’ level, su ch as “. com” or “. net” or “.fr”. 
The ne xt word to the le ft will be the next level down, but u sually the m ost imp ortant 
word from a comm ercial perspective (such as th e name of the company or busin ess). 
How ever, there may be other (even more subsidiary) word s to the  left of t hat, 
representing sub divisions o f the company or business. An email address  consists of  
two pa rts, divided by the “@”  sign. The second part is esse ntially the domain name, 
and t he first part is a local identifier within the domain.  
42. An ema il ‘addr ess’ and a n email ‘account’ are  distinct, but re lated, concepts. The 
address is simpl y the unique  identi fier for a particular e mail mailbox (or mailboxes). 
But a mailbox is part of the bu ndle of s ervices (including transmission and receipt of 
email s) provi ded by an email provider and ca lled an ema il account. So, if an email 
address  is not associated w ith a p articular email account , an email sent to that addres s 
will not arrive in any mailb ox. To ta ke an analogy, a local authority may alter the 
addre ss of a particular  house ( eg changing t he number, or the  street name), but the 
house will rem ain the same  house,  and in the same place.  Similarly, a mailbox 
forming part of an email account may h ave a par ticular address one day, and a 
different address the  next, w hilst rema ining the same mailbo x within th e same  
account.  
43. The other side of the coin is that an a ddress may be used to point to  a particular 
mailbox one day , but changed to point to a dif ferent m ailbox (whether in the same 
account or even a differe nt accou nt) the ne xt. An email address  can also be  linked to 
more than one email account, and  conversely a singl e account can be linked  to 
multiple email addresses,  by so-called ‘delegation’. In addition , an email account may 
have an address so that mail c an be re ceived on behalf of  that accou nt, but conf igure d 
so that all such mail is immediately  forwarded t o a fur ther account’s mailbox with a 
different address. Thu s, in such a case  the first mai lbox (if  indeed there is one  at all ) is 
always empty  (unless it is configured  so that copies of mai l remain in it as well). 
44. The dif ference between  an email address  and an email account  is also shown by what 
happens when ther e is a change of account. Where an email  account is changed, for 
example b ecause an old, basic account  is repla ced by a new, more s ophisticated  
account, or an emai l accoun t hosted w ith one provider or host ing service is replaced 
by an account hosted with a nother, the new account will not automat ically show 
emails sent and receiv ed by the old account. And t his is so , even if (as common ly 
happens) the s ame address tha t was us ed for the  old account is n ow bein g used to 
point to the mailbox in the new account. In order for email sent and received by the

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
13 
 old account to show in the new  account, those emails will have to b e ‘migrated’ to the 
new account,  and this is a manua l rather  than an a utomated process.   
45. Final ly, there is no necessary connection between the ow nership of the account  and 
the ownership  of the domain  within which the ma ilbox address is located. Fo r 
example , customers of an in ternet servi ce pr ovider (or ‘ISP ’) may h ave email 
accounts with the  ISP, a nd with addresses in the ISP’s domain, but (subject  to the 
terms of any contract between th em) the ISP does not own the accou nts, and the 
customers do no t own the  domain.  
46. In order t o send and r eceiv e emails, diffe rent sys tems, or protocols , are use d. An e arly 
one, which I used in the late 1990s for incomi ng mail, was ‘Post Office Protocol’, or  
POP3. This kept all incoming mail  on the server until you con nected yo ur computer to 
it (in those days , usually by dialup connecti on) and do wnloaded your mai l to a 
program on your own computer (called an ‘email clie nt’), usually leaving nothing in 
your ma ilbox on the server, where storage  was costly. You had to back up import ant 
emails yourself.  Later, ‘Int ernet  Message Access  Protoco l’, or IMA P, was introduced , 
by wh ich incoming mail stayed on the server, but was als o downloaded to your ‘email 
client’ so t hat you could deal with it offline , and then resynchronise you r compute r 
and the server nex t time you w ent o n-line. Microso ft Outlo ok and App le Mail are 
well-known e mail clients.  
47. A quite different possibility is web -based access, using ‘Hyper Text Transfe r 
Protocol’ (HTTP), or its more sec ure form HTTPS. Here there i s no emai l client on 
your co mputer. All t he software you need  is on t he remote server, which you  simply  
access over the internet, using your web browser. If you go off -line, you immediately 
lose contact with your mailbox and you r email. Hotmail and Yahoo, and other s, 
operate in this way. (I shoul d me ntion that there  is a se parate pro tocol for outgoin g 
messa ges, Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), or Exten ded Simple Mail Transfer 
Protocol (ESMT P), but that plays no part in this case, so I need not say anyt hing more  
about it.)  
48. All of this was and is sufficient for or dinary d omestic an d small business use. Bu t 
larger organisations have in recent years been of fered a more sophisticated product: 
so-called ‘enterprise servers’, runnin g software such as Microsoft  Exchange  or IBM 
Domino. The se servers ho ld and process not m erely ma il, but al so calendars/diar ies, 
contacts, journals, and other things of importance to  the multiple users of a given 
organisa tion, including greater storage fac ilities. A further protocol for email , referred 
to by so me of the wit nesses, is called Me ssaging Applicatio n Programming Int erface 
(MAPI). This was developed by Microsoft for use bet ween  Exchange server software 
and Outlo ok client applications. A MAPI emai l account will therefore be an Exchan ge 
email account. T hey (or their  equivalent from oth er IT su ppliers) p rovide a wider 
range of services than the more basic email accounts (which some  of the witnesses 
referred to as IM AP accounts). So, as the witnesses said, whereas basic email 
accounts (e specially web -based ) are usually  offered free by an internet  service 
provider or hostin g servi ce, at least up to a limited number, Exchange email  accounts 
generally have to be paid for . 
49. A ‘host’ or ‘hosting service’ is an IT business which allows  a domain to point to  its 
servers for the bene fit of the domain controller. If you have  a websi te, wheth er for 
your business, or for you personally, you wi ll need someone to host i t for you, unl ess

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
14 
 you have a server of you r own and host it there. But a h osting contract will usually  
include email s ervices too, either free or paying, depending  on the terms of the 
contract. The email a ccounts offered may be bas ic (and probably free) IM AP 
accounts, o r there may be more sophisti cated Exchange (or equivalent) a ccounts. If 
you only want em ail, and not a w ebsite, you do not need a host. An internet s ervice 
provider w ill be able to supply ema il services on its own dom ain, along with its 
internet connection . Or you can use a web -based  email service, using your exist ing 
internet connection.  
Before the P WF part nership 
50. On 20 October 2009, some months befor e the clai mants e ntered into the pa rtnership 
with Mrs Brehme’s vehic le PWF, an IT business called 0404 Crea tive Ltd, bas ed in 
Bridport, registered the domains of “axnoller.com” and “axnoller.co. uk” for tw o years  
(renewable), on Mrs Brake’s instructions. Th e registra nt was stated to be Simon  
Deverell of 0404 Creative, altho ugh the address given for him was West Axnoller 
Farm , that is, Mrs Brake’s own address. Mrs Br ake’s own written evidence in th e first 
witness s tatement made in these proceedings (on 2 Sept ember 2019 , incor porated by 
referen ce into he r witness evidence prep ared for this trial) was that these dom ains 
were reg istered for future use, and indeed were no t “used for a few years because 
instead we  used a  separate domain name, stayinstyle.co.uk”, wh ich was us ed for 
business communica tions. Thi s is consistent with th e other evidence available, and I 
accep t it. Indeed,  the Amended Particulars of Claim ([13]) p leads that the axnoller 
domain r emained do rmant u ntil 2013.  
The partnership with PWF  
51. On 19 Fe bruary 201 0 the p artnership with PWF was entered into, to car ry on t he 
existing business of sho rt-term lett ing of serviced luxury properties, alre ady known as 
‘Stay in Style’. The ‘stayins tyle’ d omain con tinued to be used for email for the new 
partnership.  
52. Between S eptembe r and November 2010 Stephen Loveridge, of an other I T company 
called Leofric Di gital, had a n email correspondence with Simon Dever ell on behalf of 
Mrs Brake about the domai ns whic h 0404 Cr eative had set up for her the previous 
year. On 17 S eptember 2 010 Mr Loveridge wrote:  
“I am acting for Alo Brake and pro ject managing a new website . I believe you 
have registered a number of domains  on her behalf, including axnoller.com, 
which is likely to  be her  new primary domain.  
Could you let me have a  list of t he doma ins you registered for her and arrange for 
them all  to be transferred. I have set up an ac count at Fasthosts for Alo. The email 
address for this (which I will receive) is axnolle r @leofri cdigita l.com…” 
53. Fasthosts Internet Ltd (“Fasthosts ”) carries on  busine ss providing a hosting service for 
domains, website s and e mail servi ces, as well as regist ering (and renewing) new 
domain names. The axnoller d omai ns were hosted by Fasthosts from a bout 1 
Nove mber 2010. It is not clea r from the evidence wh ether the registr ation of the 
domains was transferred to Mrs Brake, as ment ioned, or not. It appears from w hat

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
15 
 happened subsequently that at least the domain ax noller.co.uk was not in fact 
transferr ed to her, because she had to deal w ith this much later, i n 2019.  
54. There is no evidence to show where, if at all, the domains w ere hos ted before  
Fasthosts. The email from Mr Loveridge does not refer to any previous host ing 
service. It does refer to “a new w ebsite” and  to axnoller.com becoming  Mrs Brake’s 
“new prim ary domain ”. But there is no  evidence of a previously existing websi te in 
the axnoll er domains (which would  require hosting). The inference which I draw from 
this email and the absence of other evi denc e is th at the domains were not p reviously 
hosted at al l. This is  consis tent with Mrs Brake’s written evidence, already ment ioned,  
that the axnoller domains were n ot used “for a few years” after being registered. It  
also appears, from other documents in  the bundle , that the domain axnolle r.com  was 
not renewed,  because s ubseque ntly it came back onto the market, in July 2014, whe n 
Mrs Brake succ essfully bid for it. Th is domain was then hosted with Mr Allen’s own 
host “ 1 & 1”, rather than with Fasthosts.  
55. Also in Septe mber 20 10, Mr Loveridge i ntroduced Mrs Brake to  Simon Cat tell, t hen 
managing director of Seamless Fusion Ltd, a digi tal ma rketing co mpany based in 
Taunton.  Mrs Brake asked Seamless Fusion to create websites  and brochures for her 
business venture s, includin g Axnol ler House and Vos s, her show -jumping sta llion. 
The websit e for Axnoller House was to have the url www.axnol ler.co.uk . In October 
2010, the partnership (not Mrs Brake personally) paid Seam less Fusi on £2937.50  for 
their work, and Fasthosts £38.46. In their oral evid ence, both Mrs Brake and Mr 
Windus agreed that the partners  of Stay in Styl e “decided to rebran d the partnership as 
Axoller or Axnoller Luxury”. As part of this work, in April 2011 Seamles s Fusion se t 
up ne w Google mail  accoun ts for Mrs Brake and  the offic e at Ax noller. I find that that 
was done for th e partnershi p, and not for Mrs Brake personally.  
56. Simon Windus began working as Mrs Brake’s assistant i n Febr uary 2011. He wrote to 
Simon Cattell on 4 Apr il 201 1 from enqui ries@stayinstyleuk.com  as follows:  
“I have spo ken to Alo with regard to migrating ema il to Google mail, and we are 
happy that you go ahe ad and  create the Google mail accounts, will need b oth 
‘enquiries’ and office. Assume there be a switchover d ate and wi ll the they [sic] 
run in tandem for a few days while we get use d to them?”  
In an email  reply the next day, Simon Cattell said:  
“The new a ccount s will be enquiries@axnoller.co.uk but we wil l still have to sort  
out the stay in style acc ounts so you  get every thing into the same place.”  
57. These emails confir m what I have al ready said, that at thi s time the existing email 
accounts for the business  at Ax noller House had addresses in the ‘stayinstyl e’ dom ain. 
They also  make clear that the new e mail account s, which w ere to be G oogle mail 
accounts, would have addr esses using the doma in “axnoller.co.uk” , just like the new 
website www.axnoller.co.uk . Unlike the w ebsite , howev er, the y would not be hosted 
by F asthosts. Th ere is a q uestion as to when they actually began to be us ed. On the 
evide nce before me, the new axnoller.co.uk website  was available by November 20 11. 
That website displayed the email address enqui ries@axnolle r.co.uk . So the enqu iries 
address had at least been thou ght of by then. Mr W indus in his writte n evidence 
asserted that Mrs Brake was using the en quirie s account as her main email account

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
16 
 from 2011 . But in cross-exami nation he was taken to various documen ts in the 
bund le, and finally accepted that “it was 9 yea rs ago, so maybe  I was mistaken”.  I find 
that he was.  
58. Moreover, Mrs Brake in her written evidence claimed that  axoll er.co.uk was an 
unregistered tr ademark belong ing to her si nce 201 1. In the screenshot of the 2011 
websi te for “Axnoller Luxu ry” in the bundl e, there is a reference to ‘Axnoller ’ being 
claimed as “a legal trademark  of Axnoller ”. Howev er, the dispute with Mr s Brehme 
(referred to in paragr aph 7 above) c urtailed the webs ite project before it went live. So 
it was never publ ished. Mr Pearc e gave som e helpful, if inconclus ive, evidence on  the 
question of the use of the enquiries@axnoller.co.uk  address, to which I shall return. 
The arbitr ation between  the parties was commenced on 13 April 2012, and ended on 
21 June 2013 with th e arbitrator’s a ward in favour of Mr s Brehme’s vehicle PWF, and 
also dissolving the partnership.  
59. At about the end of 2012 , that is, during the arbitration, Mrs Brake engaged Andre w 
Allen of Allen Computer Services Ltd (“ACS” ), based i n Crewkerne, Somerset, as her 
new IT pr ovider. This involved looking after the email accounts and website, and 
providing  the IT backup, that Mr s Brake req uired both privately and for busin ess. It 
also involved his becoming the administrator of th e Fasthost s account set up in 
September 2010.  
After the dissolution of the partnership  
60. Because of the dispute with Mrs Brehme, Mrs Brake requested ACS to e nter, and on 
23 June 2014,  that company  indeed ent ered,  into a  confidentiality agreement with her, 
for a perio d of fi ve years. This required that ACS  keep c onfidential “all da ta and 
information relating to the business and management of [Mrs Brake] includi ng 
proprietary a nd trade secret technol ogy and acc ounti ng reco rds to which access is 
obtained by [AC S]”. The c onfiden tiality was expressly limited to  inform ation 
received “in and as a result of [ACS] ’s retainer by [Mrs Brake] ”. On its face therefore 
the ag reement cannot  cover information derive d from any retai ner by anyone els e. 
The evidence of Mr Allen was t hat t his agreeme nt covered not only Mrs Brak e’s 
business information but also her personal information. So far as I can see, however, 
there is no r eference in this agreement to Mrs Brake’s personal informat ion, nor to the 
informatio n (business or pers onal)  of any pers on other than Mrs Brake . The dra fting 
of the agreement is entirely geared towards the confidential business  information  of 
Mrs Brake al one.  
61. In early 2015, it appears tha t the Brakes were having  intern et connection proble ms a t 
Axnoller, an d on 8 Feb ruary 2 015 a Mark Culme -Seymour emailed  Mrs Brake about 
her problems and to arrange a possible site visit. The significance of the email is tha t, 
in the version found in the bund le, it wa s addressed to  Mrs Brak e at 
enquiri es@axnoller.co.uk . This i s several  months before the sale of the property by 
the receivers and the incorporation of Sarafina . But t he native copy of, and the 
metadat a relati ng to, this em ail were not produced, and th erefore could not be vi ewed 
or tested. Moreover, there is a stran ge line a t the top of the page in the version in the 
bundle, suggesting that it is only part of a larger c hain, which has not been exhibited . 
In any  event, the em ail itsel f is quite anodyne a nd of no interes t other wise to th is cas e.

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
17 
 62. Mrs Brake claimed to ha ve paid t he Fasthosts account payments  herself even during 
the period of the partnership with PW F. However , she produced no documentary 
evidence to support this c laim, eve n though this would come  from her ow n bank or 
credit card c ompany . I accept that the Fasthosts  invoices were addressed  to her  
throughout this time , as they were from 2009, but the evidence th at I have seen 
satisfi es m e that d uring the  continuance of the pa rtnership wi th PWF it was the 
partn ership whic h pai d the invoices.  It is therefore n ot necessary for me to res ort to 
any presumption such as is found in cases like Wisniew ski v Central Manche ster 
Health Authority  [1998] PIQR 324, CA.  
The claimants ’ bankruptcy  
63. As a result of a failure to pay costs ord ers resulting from the arbitration awar d, Mr and 
Mrs Br ake were adjudica ted bankrupt on 1 2 May 201 5, and their estate s vested (wi th 
the usual  statutory exce ptions) in the Of ficial Receiver, and subsequently in their  
trustee in bankruptcy. It is convenient to record here that, when Mr and Mrs Br ake 
subsequently provided the Offi cial Receiver wit h detail s about thems elves, nei ther of 
them gave th e enquiries acc ount add ress as a  ‘personal’ conta ct detail. Mrs Brake 
gave  enquiries@stayinstyleuk.com . Mr Brake said that he had none  at all . Mrs Brake  
also did not assert , either in the stan dard Bankruptcy Pr eliminary Informatio n 
Quest ionnaire (dated  4 June 2 015), or at the interview with the Official Receiver on 9 
June 2015,  that she owned the axnolle r domain , or any associated email accounts.  
64. On the day  followi ng the bankru ptcy adjudication , that is , 13 May 2015, M r Allen 
sent an emai l to Mrs Brake (at enquirie s@stay instyleuk.com ). It said:  
“Following ou r chat this morning  please find attached  our quote for a hi gh spec 
HP 17  inch laptop for b usiness use and a  lower spec 15.6 inc h perso nal laptop as 
discussed”  (emphasis supplied).  
The attached quotation (address ed to “Mrs N Brake” at “West Axnol ler Farm”) was 
not only for the laptop and personal  computers, but als o for other s ervices, including : 
“Setup  Business  laptop , install all  update s and programs as require d. Transfer 
data from old work laptop as required, s et up email accounts and import em ails 
and ad dress book. Transfer all data as require d.… Set up Personal  laptop, inst all 
all updates an d progra ms as req uired, set up email account s and import address 
book .…” 
65. Mr Allen re -sent that quotation by email on 18 A ugust 2015, saying:  
“Hi, Alo,  
HP Laptop quot e as sent in May – pricing may have chan ged a little but no t 
radically, let me know what y ou think ?”  
It is clear that that res ending was a response to somethi ng from Mrs Brake, but so far 
as I can see we do not  have that in the material before me. It is n evertheless odd to 
find Mrs Brake consid ering the acquisiti on of assets for the purposes o f carryi ng on a 
business , when not on ly is s he an undischarged bankru pt, but also (by August)

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
18 
 prohibited by injunction fr om car rying on the business. But I  heard no a rgument about 
this, and draw no conclusi ons. 
The sale of We st Axnoller F arm to Sarafina Pr operties  Ltd 
66. On 2 3 July 201 5, W est Ax noller Farm was sold, nominally by Mrs Brake as 
registered proprietor of the legal estate,  but in reality by the Law of Property Act 
receivers  appointed by the chargee of the p roperty,  and acting in he r name . The 
purcha se price  was £2,460,000, pl us a ny app licable  VAT. The purchaser was 
Sarafina , a company incorporate d on 2 June 2015, the sole share in whi ch was issued  
to Mrs Brake’s friend, the Hon Sa ffron Foster , a daughter of the third  Lord Vestey. In  
Compani es House records, B PE S olicitors LLP of Cheltenham are stated to have 
acted as her agent. In the bundle is an  invoice i ssued by that firm for its se rvices in 
incorporating  Sarafina. It is however not addressed  to Mrs Foster, but to a Ms Alice 
Wyatt at an address in Devon . An ema il in the bundle fr om Mrs Brake to Ms Wyatt  
dated 16 November 2017 suggests that she w as Mr Brake’s sister ’s daughter,  and, in 
cross-examination, Ms Brown referred to Ms Wyatt as Mrs Brake’s niece . 
67. Ms Wya tt’s role in rel ation to Sarafina is nowher e explain ed. She may, of cou rse, 
have been an agent  for Mrs Foster. But I also note that there is an email apparently 
from her dated 2 2 January 2018 in the bun dle, in which she complains about a parking 
ticket issued  to her in Be aminster, Dorse t, where she was atte nding an urgent doc tor’s 
appointment  on 19 January 2018. Why Miss Wyatt should have a GP in Beaminster , 
Dorset , when she li ves in De von, is not explaine d. But on the other hand Beaminster 
is very close to Ax noller. Moreo ver, the email is sent from the account with the 
addres s enquiries@axnoller .co.uk , which  Mrs B rake said only she used, and not from 
the (different) email address to which Mrs Brake’s email of  16 November 201 7 
(above) was  sent. Mr Spendlove was cros s-exam ined by Ms Brown abou t this email.  
68. In the bundle there is also a copy of a report by Lorna Townsend dated 11 Septe mber 
2019. She  says that she is a former solicitor but now a consultant employed  by 
Birketts  LLP to conduct investigations into workpla ce issues. She was instructe d by 
the defendan ts to investigate the conduct of the Brakes during their employment. At 
paragraph 3.127 sh e refers to evidence from  the defendant s’ bookkeeper, Jo  Hague , to 
the effect  that the Brakes had told her  that the car i n the n ame of A lice Wyatt wa s 
their car, but as bankrupts they were unable to ente r into a hire purchase agreement. 
But this is multipl e hearsay, and none of it was put to Mrs Brake, so I do not know 
what she would say about it. I do not take it into accou nt or draw any conclusions 
from it.  
69. Mrs Foste r did not put up  any money  to buy West Axnoller Farm. Instead, Sarafina 
appears to have borrowed all the mo ney from a lender found by Mrs Bra ke, who 
seems to have made al l the arrangem ents. Th e property was valu ed at £4.5 million  by 
Savill s, in a valua tion arranged by Mrs Brake, but seemingly  paid for by Sarafina 
itself. T he lende r, on the basis of this valuatio n, lent £2.88 million gross, that i s 
£2.505 million net of fee s and advance interest o f £375,000. In ot her words, the len der 
lent m ore tha n the purchase price, even after deducting fees  and advance interest. This 
is extraord inary. Commercial lenders do not usually do this. I am driven to the 
conclus ion that either th e lender was d eceived  into lending the am ount it did , becau se 
the true value  was the lower  price that  Sarafina paid, or the  true value signif icantly 
exceeded what  was paid by Sarafina, thus prejudicing the ba nk. Given the high

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
19 
 reputation in which Savills i s held, I cons ider the latter to be the m ore likely.  But fo r 
presen t purpose s it is not ne cessary for me to make a finding about this.   
70. As I have already said, Mr and Mrs Brake were prohibited by an injunction  dated 1 
July 2015 from  continuing to run the w edding bus iness  at the property, for a pe riod 
lasting  six mo nths. Neve rtheles s, Mrs  Foster was apparently prepared to allow  Mr and 
Mrs Brake to remain in occupati on of the house rent free, thereby taking up sp ace 
which could be used  for the business, but apparently contr ibuting nothing to it, whi ch 
was to be run by  another  friend of Mrs Brake’s, called Rebecca Holt,  until the 
injuncti on ran out in January 2016.  
The business carried on by Sarafina  
71. Mrs Holt was appointed a director of Sarafina  on 1 September 2015.  She went on 
maternity leave  in Ju ne 2016,  and resigned in J une 2017 before r eturning . 
Interestingly, there i s in the  bundle a copy of a statement from a Ba rclays Bank 
account in the name of Rebecca Holt dated 1 February 2017, which i s plainly full of 
business transactio ns connected with t he weddi ng business at Axn oller, suc h as staff 
wages , payments to outside c ontracto rs and so on, but also personal expense s such as 
school fees for Mrs Brake’s son Tom and a standing order for payment s in respect of 
a car for Alice Wyatt , whom I have alrea dy menti oned . This sta teme nt was not  put to 
Mrs Brake in cross -examination, so  I do not know how she would have dealt with  it. 
But at first sight it is strange to find  that a n employee  on maternity leave (as Mrs Holt 
then was)  should be operating a bank ac count paying expenses for the Axnoll er 
business and also payin g Mrs Brake’s (and Ms  Wyatt ’s) own personal expenses.  
72. An earlier bank statement, covering August 2015, also  from a Barclays Bank account 
in the name of Rebecca Holt (but with a different accou nt number), was put to Mrs 
Brake in cross -examination. She acc epted that it conta ined business tr ansactions 
connected wi th A xnoller and also some personal expenses of her own, including 
school fees and optician ’s bills, but also some transac tions  relating to Mrs Holt. In 
relation to this statement Mr s Brake re jected the suggestion that the account was a 
nominee account for h er (as indeed Mr Davies QC had done on her behalf b efore Mr 
Jarvis QC in November 2019). She explained this use of Mrs H olt’s bank acco unt by 
reason  of the  fact th at Sarafina did n ot yet hav e its own bank account, whi ch was not 
set u p until 19 August 2015.  That may be for a  good  explanation in August 2015 , but 
it does not he lp me to understand why there is a further  bank st ateme nt in 2017 , also 
in the name o f Rebecc a Ho lt, and  appar ently still deali ng also with both Axnol ler 
business and Mrs Brake’s personal e xpenditure. 
73. There is, incid entally, an email in the bundle dated 21 August 201 5 from a man called 
Bob Holt (who may o r may not be re lated to Rebecca Holt) to the Dors et branch  of 
Handelsb anken, saying “a very good fri end of mine Alo Brake owns Axnoller a 
prestige event complex in Do rset and she is looking to refinance”. On 2 Septemb er 
2015 Savills invoiced Sarafina for £ 4200, including  VAT, to value West Axnoll er 
Farm for “security” purpos es. This is without do ubt the invoice for the valuation on 
the basis of which the loan was made for the purchase of West Axnoller Farm. On 3 
Septem ber 2015 there is further email corresp ondence between  Mrs Brake and 
Santander i n Bourne mouth con cerning a po ssible refinancing.

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
20 
 74. However th at may be, in early August 2015, Mrs Br ake had asked Mr Allen to s et up 
a new Exchange account hosting package with F asthosts. There is an email dated 5 
August 2015 from M r Allen to Mrs Brake (at enquiries@ stayinstyleuk.com ), saying 
that he nee ded some  information before  he could make any progress, because the 
domain axn oller.co.uk was hosted with Fasthosts a nd he needed to  be able to login to 
that system. So he ask ed for the e mail ad dress and passw ord for logging into the 
control panel for Fast hosts. In a further email o f 7 August 2015 , he said that 
“axnoller.co.uk is hos ted with Fasthosts but there is curren tly no email pa ckage.” I 
find that, at thi s stage,  there wa s a domain (axnoll er.co.uk), hoste d on Fa sthosts, but 
no email accounts so hoste d. They w ere still Google ma il accounts.  
75. There is an invoice from Fasthosts dat ed 14 August 2015 stating that payment  had 
now been c ollected for “Exchange 2013  Hosted Mailboxes  – axnoller .co.uk (3 x 25 
GB hoste d Mailb oxes, 2 x StarterPlus Mailboxes)”. Alth ough initially paid by credi t 
card (which during cross -examination Mrs Brake sa id belonged to Rebecca Holt) , this 
was ultimately pai d for by Sarafina, as indee d I find  it ultim ately paid for all  Fasthost s 
invoices relating to the axnoller domain and emai l accounts  until February 2017, and 
indeed thereafter , though under its new name,  AEL . Then the ne xt da y, 15 August 
2015, Mr Allen ha d sent an email,  with subje ct “New Email  Acco unt Test”, to a 
number of  addresses in the domain n ame “axnoller .co.uk”, including “alo@”, 
rebecca@”, “enquiries@”, “saffron@” and “andy@”. In cross -exam ination Mrs 
Brake said that the only new email account was  that for Saffro n Foster, b ut I do not 
accept  this. The five a ddresses  in the test email corresp onded to the five new 
mailboxes in the exchange ema il package from Fasthosts. And certainly, o n the 
evidence, this is the fir st time that any email account was given the addres s 
alo@axnolle r.co.uk  or andy@axnoller.co.uk . An email apparently sent on 18 August 
2015 from enquiries @axn ollerevents. co.uk  (rather than enquiries@axn oller.co.uk ) 
acknowledged receipt of this test ema il.  
76. The reference to ‘axnollerevents.co.uk’ in thi s acknowledgment email was i nitially 
puzzling, because it was common groun d that that domain was n ot se t up until 
Decemb er 2018.  So something had happened  to make the email sent in 2015 appear to 
have come  from the newer domain. In evidence, Mr Pearce acce pted at first that it 
was po ssible that this was the resul t of a so-called  ‘delegatio n’ attempt. B ut he  later 
agreed wit h the ex planation given by  Mr Blackband  of Gran t Thornton , who (as I 
have said) prepa red the expert report in this matter  ordered by Mr Jarvis QC . In his 
report Mr Blackband had said, in relatio n to emails appearing to have been sent from 
axnollerevents.co .uk on dates bef ore that domain wa s registered,  that:  
“43. … the appearance of some of the printed emails suggesting that they are 
originating from ax nollerevents. co.uk is d ue to the emails bei ng o pened within 
the axnoll erevents.co.u k mai lbox. However, it  needs t o be not ed that the origin al 
technical headers from the em ail do not get chan ged, only the w ay in which 
Outlook displays them within the mailbo x”. 
That expl anation, a dopted by Mr Pearce,  is the same one as is give n by Ms D’A lbiac-
Reay of Labyrinth Com puter s Ltd to  Dr Guy in a lette r of 10 June 2019. It is also 
consistent with the o ther evidence, including that of Mr Bowyer, and I accept it.  
77. Acco rdingly, I fi nd that, o n 15 August 2015, ne w em ail accounts using the 
‘axnoller.co. uk’ d omain had been se t up wit h Micros oft Exchange, host ed by

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
21 
 Fasthos ts. As I have said,  if there had been any axnoller do main email addresses 
before this, they had been use d for Google mail accou nts, unhosted. So, w hereas the 
address enqu iries@ax noller.co.uk , if it pointed an ywhere at all, woul d have 
previously p ointed to a Goo gle mail account, from now on it pointed to a Micro soft 
Exchange  account, with a mailbox on th e Fasthosts server. (On the  other hand, the 
addresses alo@axnoller.c o.uk and andy@axnoller.co.uk , with their respective 
Exchange  accounts, we re entirel y new at that stage. )  
78. I find that, from the beg inning, altho ugh s he had her own  axnoller  account, with the 
address alo@axnoller.co.uk , Mrs Brake used  the (Exchange) account with the address 
enquiries@axnoller.co.uk  for her  own private email s as well , even  though she had 
other private email accounts as well (for example Gm ail). But  at the sa me time , as the  
Brakes accept,  it was the main business email addr ess for Sara fina, and held out as 
such, and continued to be after  the purchase by D r Guy , and the chang e of na me to 
AEL , until  at least November 2018 . 
79. I referred above to paymen t of Fasthosts invo ices by Sarafin a from August 2015 
onwards. As I have als o said,  the invoices themselves w ere all originally a ddressed 
from 2010  to Mrs  Brake person ally. T here is a dispute  as to whether this continued 
through to November 2018. Mrs Brake says it did. Yet at  least some of the invoices in 
the bundle seem to be add ressed to AEL , although they date  from be fore Febru ary 
2017, when Saraf ina’s n ame was changed t o AEL . I think  the explanation for this is 
the one given by Mr Bl ackband in his report and accepted by Mr Pearce in his 
evidence, t o wh ich I referred abov e. Accordingly,  it may well be that, u ntil No vember 
2018,  the inv oices were origin ally addressed to Mrs Brake, and s he was Fasthosts’ 
direct customer.  
80. On the other han d, Mr Allen ’s invoices were addressed to  ‘Sarafina trad ing as 
Axnoller ’ from August 2015 onwards , and AEL  after Februa ry 2017, and  were  paid 
by the busines s. I find that  Mr Allen and his company were retained by Sar afina/ AEL  
generally for comput er services , as he said in his  first witness statement, which was 
drafted by his own  independent solic itors. I reject the  view ex presse d in his se cond 
witness s tatement that  he was engaged only by Mrs Brake personally. In deed, in  
cross -examination he accepted that sometimes he acted for Mrs  Brake and som etimes 
for the third defendant . 
81. As I have said, Saraf ina/AEL  ultimately paid the  Fasthosts invoi ces concerning the 
axnoller do main and emails. I reject Mrs Brake’s evidence rela ting to the invoice for 
£284. 28 for which only a draft ledger was produced. I also reject her ev idence that it 
was she who in subst ance paid Fasthosts ’ invoices during the time  of the partnership 
with Patle y Wood Farm, and find that the partnership ultimate ly paid them. For the 
avoidance of any doubt, M rs Brake had also registered o ther domains, conn ected w ith 
horses, includin g her sta llion Voss. The renewa l fees for these domai ns in 2017 had 
been paid for b y Sarafina (by then AEL ), who w as subsequently reimbur sed by Mrs 
Brake. I am n ot concerned with these other domai ns. But it is  notabl e that Mrs B rake, 
in reimburs ing the fees for these  domains, made no clai m that the axnoller d omain 
and the associated email accounts also belonged to her , and did not offer to repay 
those . (Subsequently in her first witness statem ent in these proce edings,  Mrs Brake 
implied, at [26] , that the  third defenda nt’s funding  the cost of the axnoller domai n was 
an empl oyee be nefit. This is not supp orted, so far as I can see, by any other  document.

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
22 
 In any event, on 15 January 2018 Mrs Brake told her own accou ntant i n an email t hat 
she did not h ave any benefits in ki nd.) 
82. In the trial bundle there is an email sent from a c ustomer  to Mrs Brake on 20 Aug ust 
2015 and a reply the same day from M rs Brake to  that customer which refers to 
Rebecca Holt . As I have alread y said,  she was the  person engaged t o run th e wedding 
business at Axno ller for Sarafina during the ti me that Mr an d Mrs B rake were not able 
to do so, by reason of the injunction grante d against t hem on 1 July 2015 by Sir 
William Blackburn e. These emails sh ow that  Ms Holt (or  someone  using he r name) 
had been using  the email a ddress rebecca@stayinstyle uk.com , but that towards the 
end of Aug ust 2015 it  would change to rebecc a@axnoller.c o.uk. I say “som eone usi ng 
her name”, because ther e is an email in the bundle fro m Mrs Brake t o a lad y called 
Karen at House  Party Solutions, dated 25 August 2015, in which Mr s Brake says “all 
my emails are signed Rebe cca at the moment.  I will  call and ex plain. B est Alo.”  In 
cross-examination,  Mrs Brake a ccepted that she “did occasiona lly dip in an d help 
[Rebecca Holt] to … reorganise th ings”. The evidence before me suggests that it was 
rather more than that,  but it is not necessar y to d ecide t he point now .  
83. In addition, when  the defendants’ solicitors suggested to the claimant s’ solicitors 
during the litigation that Reb ecca Ho lt used the enquiries a ccount, the claim ants’ 
solicitors denied it.  Yet M rs Brake also accepted in cross -examina tion th at Rebecca 
Holt did use the enqu iries account, an d indeed the relevant software progr am was 
downloaded onto her work laptop for t his pur pose. So far as concern s Mrs Holt’s own 
account , the first use of rebecca@a xnoller.co.u k appears in an ema il dated 28 Augus t 
2015. Other email exchanges in the  bundle between Ms Holt and customers show t hat 
the change from enquiries@ stayinstyle.uk.com  to enquirie s@ax noller.co.uk  occurred 
earlier, on 21 August 2015 . 
84. Mr P earce, who was retained by Mrs Brake a s a for ensic IT specialist for  the purposes 
of this litigation, examined such comp uter files as were made availabl e to h im, 
including an ol d hard drive which M rs Br ake located in March 2020. He gave 
evidence (whic h I accept) that he had not been able to rec over an y em ails from any 
accou nt using the addr ess enquiries@axnol ler.co .uk before the tes t email from Mr 
Allen jus t referred t o of 15 August 2015 (which was then p ointing to the new 
Exchange account hosted w ith Fas thosts). However he als o said (and I acc ept) that his 
forensic work on the  materials provided to him enabl ed him  to “se e a count of  
300,000 emails date d on or before Au gust 2015  … A subset of these emails w ere sent 
to and from enquir ies@axnoller.co. uk". (It is clear from this that – contrary to what 
Mrs Brake all eged i n cross -examination  – Mr Pearce was not saying  that ther e were 
300,000 emails in the account th en addressed by enquiries@a xnoller.co.uk , merely 
that some of them were .) But he was unable to obtain the s ubstan ce of these emails.  
85. Accordingly, a  curious feature of th is case is that,  although Mrs Brake’s evidence  is 
that the (Google mail) account using t he enquiries@axnoller.co.uk  addre ss was in use 
between 201 1 and 2015, w e have al most no tangible eviden ce of this. One m ight have 
thought that, if Mrs Brake had use d the account to email friends and family (a t least ), 
she could have count ed on them  to provide her with examples of that use  from their 
own email acc ounts . Yet none has been provided (unless the  single exam ple f rom 
Februa ry 2015 about internet problems is  one such).  No explanation for this singular  
omiss ion has been put forwar d.

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
23 
 86. In the t rial bundle there was also an email refe rring to a ‘bounceback’ me ssage 
receive d by a c ustomer who had attempte d to send a n emai l to the address  
enquiries@axnoller.co.u k on 2 0 Ma rch 2014. However, it was not possible to say 
what was the reason for the ‘bounceback’. It only showed  that t he messa ge sent did 
not arrive i n any mailb ox. Th e email w as subsequently forwarded by the c ustomer to 
enquiries@sta yinstyleuk. com, and that transmission was successf ul. The failed email 
to enquiries@a xnolle r.co.uk does not permit me to draw any inf erence, except that 
that address must have been displa yed som ewhe re seen by the custo mer in order for 
him to try it.  
87. There was also some evidence of us e of an accou nt using the  address 
enquir ies@axnoller.co .uk having been used to login and  amend  a draft email template 
on the Stay in  Style account (probably using  ‘delegated access’). The important 
question w as when this happened. Th at document had head ers as follows:  
“From: Stay In Style – Enquiries <enquiri es@sta yinstyleuk.com> on behalf of  
Stay in Style – Enquiries  
Sent:  08 December  2011 1 2:18 
Subject: Voltaire,  Burggraaf and Axnoller House”  
There was no he ader beginnin g “To:” and the body of the mess age beg an “Dear 
[blank].” Mr Pearce consid ered that this “was m ore a template than a draft” , because 
there was no “To:” header, but he could n ot confirm either way. He also considered 
that the date which had bee n put  in the “Sent:” head er did not mean that  the me ssage 
had ever been sent, but that it was s imply the dat e that “this template was first 
created”. 
88. In the metadata for this email the “de livery time” is stated as 5 No vember 2015, and 
that refers (in the w ords o f Mr Pe arce) “to th e date and time that  the template w as last 
updated or changed in some way”. There w as nothing to show that that updatin g 
chan ge must have happened before 15 August  2015. More over, the metadata also 
showed that the account which acc essed this te mplate was a  MAPI -LID Internet 
Account, that is , an account using MAPI. That indic ates, as I ha ve already said, and as 
Mr Pearce co nfirmed in his evidence, an Exchange email a ccount and probably other 
Micr osoft products (such as Outlook). Yet the ev idence in this case  shows, and I have 
found, that the first Exchange email accounts were not set up un til August 2015. The 
previous accoun ts were Google mail accounts.  
89. Unfortunately,  this p oint was not put to Mr Pearce when he was giving evidence, a nd 
therefore I do not hav e the benefit of his  response to it.  But, on the face of it, it seems 
to me that, i f the account which altered the templ ate wa s an account using MAPI, and 
therefore  an Exc hang e account, and the account indicated by the address 
enquiries@axnoller .co.uk was a Google mail account u ntil August 2015, when that 
address was transferr ed to a new Exchange server account hosted b y Fasth osts, it 
follows that t he change to the template must have t aken p lace be tween August  and 
December 2015.  
90. The result is t hat I have been shown  only a single  example of an email successfully 
sent to or from  the email address enquirie s@axnoller.co.uk  before August 2015 , and

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
24 
 that is the one from  Mr Culme -Seymour se nt to that addre ss on 8 February 2015  
(which, becau se it cannot  be tested, is not itself conclusive) . I am however satisfied on 
this evidence (includin g that of Mr Pearce) that there was an email account  in 
existence before August 2015 to which the address  enquiries@axnol ler.co.uk  pointed, 
but it must have been a Google mail account, and could not have been  the Exchange 
server ac count created in August 2015 . Moreove r, on this ev idence, I am  satisfied that 
before then the busi ness carried on by Mrs Brake  (and, before that , the business 
carried on by the partn ership) used email accounts based on stayins tyleuk. com (as 
Mrs Brake herse lf said in her written evidence) .  
91. In my ju dgment , whether  the allegation in paragraph 70(b ) of the c laimant s’ opening 
submissions that “the en quiries account  [meaning the one using the addres s 
enquiries@axnoller.co.uk ] was being operated by the Brakes s ince 2 011 for  several 
years before SPL was in corporated  [and] therefore contains thousands of ema ils 
which could  not possibly have anything to do with SPL” was right or not is irrelevant 
to this litigation . With one exception, we do not have  any emails s ent to or from the  
address enquiries@ axnoller.co.uk  before August 2015, or any accoun t to which that 
address then pointed, so that in e ffect (with that excepti on) there are none to argue 
about . The def endants  do not have them,  and cannot ac cess them, any mo re than Mr 
Pearce was able to. The argument here must accordingly be directed to emails c reated 
from August 2015 onwards , which resid e in a new Microsoft Exchange account, to 
which the address enquiries@axnoll er.co .uk from then pointed . 
92. On 12 May 2 016 the Brak es were automatically discharged from  bankruptcy. On that 
day Mrs Brake enquired of the Official Receiver’s Off ice whether that was correct. 
On bein g told it was,  Mrs Brake asked for disc harge certificate s to be sent to her. In 
June 2016 Rebecc a Holt went on maternity leave  (as I have already s aid, in fact she 
never returned, resigning  in June 2017 ), and Simon Windus came to work for 
Sarafina, i n part  to sub stitute fo r Mr s Ho lt. A new laptop an d email addr ess were  
provided for him. On 1 July 20 16, M rs Brake  (using the enquiries@axnoller.co.u k 
address) sent an email to a poten tial customer describing  herse lf as “ the owner of 
Axnoller”. On 22 Ju ly 20 16, an admin istratio n order was made in relation to  the 
former p artnership ‘Stay in Style’. To com plete the  story of the insolvency of Stay in 
Style, on 30 May 2017, a winding up ord er was made, and liquida tors o f the 
partnership wer e appointed.  
Sale of Sarafina to Chedingto n 
93. In the mea ntime, in February 2017,  the sha re capital of Saraf ina was sold by Mrs 
Foster t o Chedington , owned by  Dr Guy. Stephen Ryde -Weller of Verison a Law acted 
for Mrs Foste r, and James  Allen of Moore Blatch a cted for Chedington. The 
transaction completed on 17 Fe bruary 2017.  
94. A cur ious feat ure of the negotiations leading up to the  completion was that Mrs F oster 
took no part in them, apa rt from confir ming to Mr Ryd e-Weller, w ho was engag ed as 
her solicitor, tha t he could take full instru ctions from Mrs Brake on eve rything. Dr 
Guy’s e vidence, whic h I accept, was that he met Mrs Foste r only once, well into the  
trans action, and that there wa s no discussio n between them (then or a t any other time) 
of either the transaction o r its details. Dr Guy’s negotiations were with Mrs Brake, 
ostensibly on behalf  of Mrs Foster. Of c ourse, Mr s Brake ha d been running the 
busin ess ca rried o n at Axnoller, and  would kno w more of the day to day runn ing

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
25 
 matters than Mrs F oster. But Mrs Brake no t only informed Dr Guy a nd Mr Ryde -
Weller of the da y-to-day matters, but also negotiated with Dr G uy on pri ce, and ga ve 
instructions to Mr Ry de-Weller in relation to all th e terms of  the agreement being 
negotiat ed, including warranti es, just as if she w ere the beneficial owner.  
95. This strange impression is co mpounded by the terms of a n email sent by Mrs B rake 
from  the enquiries@ax noller.co.u k address to Mrs Saf fron Fo ster on 17 February 
2017 (the date of completi on), in which Mrs Brake said  
“Fortune favours the b rave! You were incredibly  brave to trust me and  to lend 
us your ve ry good name (as oppose d to u sing ou r appallingly bad  name)!”  
This was in reply to a n email  from Mrs Brake to Mrs Fo ster asking for her ban k 
account details. Mrs F oster had given these, whic h show that the bank acc ount 
concerned is not in her name . On 17 M arch 2017,  Mrs Brake g ave in structi ons (f rom 
the sam e email account ) to Mr Ryde-Well er to t ransfer £100,000 and £290,000 to th at 
same bank account.  
96. In this connection, I  bear in mind the terms of Mrs Foster’s witn ess statement of 28 
February 2019, made in these proce edings fo r an in terlocutory purpose, in which she 
asser ted that she had given t he Brakes £2.6 million out of the proceeds of sale of 
Sarafina, and denied that  there was any pre -arran gement between the p arties. As I 
have said, Mrs Foster was not called  to give evidence . These documents were not p ut 
to Mrs Brake in c ross-exam ination , so I have not heard her explanat ion o f them, and it 
is not necessa ry for me to decide anything about them  now. 
97. A furt her feature in rel ation to this case is that the original draft purchas e agreement  
put forward on beh alf of Ch edington c ontained fa irly s tandard warran ties relating to 
intellec tual prop erty rig hts owned or enjoyed by Sarafina. Mr Ryde -Weller’s evidence 
was th at M rs Brake told him th at Sarafina “had created a very minimal inte llectual 
property rights and h ad little  to no IT systems”. M r Ryde -Weller sought  to reduce the 
exposure o f the ven dor of t he company by removing the intellectual pro perty 
warranties. Altho ugh there was “push back ” from Chedington’s lawyers  in relation to 
the removal of employment  warra nties, th ere was no ne from tho se law yers on remova l 
of warranties relating to the in tellectu al property rights and IT systems. Mr Ryde -
Well er gave evidence th at he thought that Dr Gu y was not interested in the  wedding 
business , because h e wanted the proper ty for ot her, eques trian uses.   
98. Mr R yde-Weller may  well have obtained that impression. As  I say, I found him to be 
an honest witness. But , if so, I do not think i t was a true or a complete impression. 
After all, he n ever spoke  to Dr Guy. Most o f his non -documenta ry inform ation came  
from Mrs Brake. It is to be no ted that, once Che dington had acqu ired Sarafina, it 
employed the Brakes to continue t he business as befor e. And Dr Guy’s evidence wa s 
that the business was imp ortant, no t only to pay for the upkeep o f the p roperty 
(including any equest rian facilities), but  also because (as Mrs Brake hersel f says in 
her written evidence) the company would b e a business asset f or tax purposes. He 
negotia ted a significant  figure with Mrs Bra ke for the value of t he busine ss on top of 
the va lue of the  real e state. He would not have  done this if h e had thought tha t it was 
valueless. He is, after all, a successful bu sinessman. I find  therefore that Dr Guy was 
very interested in the wedding  busine ss, and that Mr Ryde -Weller wa s in this respect 
mistaken .

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
26 
 99. The nego tiations between Mrs Brake a nd Dr Guy  involved provision  for assets to be 
excluded from the sale, such as the fu rniture in Axn oller House, and the wedding 
licence . Despite t he absence  of the  IP warran ties, there w as nev er any suggestion that 
the d omain axn oller.co.uk or the email account then bea ring the address 
enquiries@axnoller.co .uk should be excluded . No r was there any sugg estion tha t 
Saraf ina did no t own them. I ndeed,  Mrs Brake had told Dr Guy i n an earl ier email that 
Sarafina owned everything and she and her husband owned noth ing. It is also the case 
that the statements made b y the Brakes to the Off icial Receiver at the ti me of thei r 
bankr uptcies in  May 2015 mak e no r eference to any domain names , email a ccounts or 
websites  as forming part of th eir assets, although there are ref erences to the Stay in 
Style email accounts in rela tion only to business a ddresses. In cross -exami nation, Mr s 
Brake  said it d id not enter her mi nd to tell Dr Guy that the s ale of Sa rafina did not 
include the account with t he address enquiries@axnoller.co.uk . 
100. Moreover, a due diligen ce letter sent by the pu rchaser’s lawyers  to the ve ndor’s 
lawyer s by e mail dated 7 January 2017 in cluded a request for:  
“5.2. Details of the compute r hardware, databases, software an d networks owned 
or used by the Company (Computer S ystem). 
5.3. Details of , and copies of all docu ments rela ting to : 
5.3.1. a ny element of  the C omputer System that is owned  by 1/3 p arty and 
licensed o r leased to the Compan y, including all open source softw are licenses; 
and 
5.3.2. any software used by the C ompany and hosted by a third party application 
service pr ovider or cloud s ervice provid er, wh ether as a software as a ser vice, 
platform as a service or as an infrastructur e as a service arrangement.  
5.4. D etails of any assets used by the Company in connect ion with its business 
that are owned by , or sha red with, either the seller s or any othe r pers on.” 
(Emphasis supplied.)  
Mrs Foster signed a disclosure  letter dated 17 Febru ary 2017 in connection with the 
sale and purchase. It refers for example to the weddi ng licence, but it does  not refer to 
the domain  or to the  accoun t with the  address enquiries@axnoller. co.uk . 
101. In its final f orm, the agreement entered into pr ovided for the sale and purchase of the 
share capit al of Sarafina to Chedi ngton “subject to the te rms of thi s Agree ment”. 
Those terms incl uded c ertain covenants, indemnitie s and war ranties. The genera l 
warranties included (at schedule 6, part 1):  
“5.1. The  Company has all necessary licences, and consents, currently necessary 
to carry on the business th at it has carried  on up to and include i ng the  date of this 
Agreement in t he places  and in the manner and with the frequency  in which its 
business is carried on, all of which are valid and subsisting.  
5.2. The  business to which para graph 5.1 above relates is the wed ding an d private 
events busine ss as well as the holiday rental b usiness.

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
27 
 5.3 There is curren tly no known reason wh y any of those licences or consent s 
should be suspended, cancelled, revoked or not re newed on the same terms . 
[ … ] 
13.1. The Compan y is the f ull leg al and ben eficial owner  of, a nd has good and 
marketable t itle to, all the assets incl uded in the Accounts, any assets acquired 
since the Acco unts Date and all other assets used by the Company  except for 
those dispos ed of since the Accounts  Date in t he norm al course of business a nd 
such assets are free from any E ncumbranc e. 
[ … ]  
13.3. The Company is in possessi on and control of all the assets i ncluded in the 
Accounts, or acquired since the Acco unts Date and all other  assets used by the 
Comp any, excep t those  Disclosed  as being in the po ssession of a third party in  the 
norm al course of busine ss.” (Emphasis supplie d.) 
102. Mrs Brake was not formally a p arty to the agreement between Mrs Foster and 
Chedin gton. But she had negot iated it in detail, and knew every thing t hat was in  it. 
She was and is  an experienced businesswoma n, with a  background in fina nce and 
asset manageme nt. In her witness statement dated  9 July 2020 (stated to be the fifth, 
though it fol lows her seventh, of 1 June 2020), she refers a t paragrap h 12(b)  to the 
warranty at par a 13.1  (set out above) that Sarafi na owned the assets it used in the 
business. She s aid of this: “as Dr Guy was told a t the time of the sale of the share 
capital that di d not include the websi te or domain, and by ext ension the  email 
accounts”.  In his own e videnc e Dr Guy denies being told t his. Mrs Brake was cross -
examined about this at so me length during the trial. She in itially said that she 
“probably” informed Dr Guy “i ndirectly”, through Mrs  Foster’s solicitors. Bu t later in  
the cr oss-examin ation she cha nged g round, and instead insisted that, wit hout ever 
being inf ormed of it, Dr Guy no netheless knew that the sale did n ot include these 
things, because  the intellectual p roperty rights warranti es had been removed from  the 
sale and pur chase agre ement, and th is wou ld have demonstrated to him that thos e 
rights were not i ncluded.  
103. In cross -examination,  Dr Guy said that he w as aware that the intellectual property 
right warra nties had come out , but that h e was told by his  lawyers that  they were ove r 
excessive for this t ype of transaction. He fu rther sai d tha t he was comforta ble, 
because what h e needed was covered by clause 13,  which was simpler. He agreed that 
this was not a t echnology or pharmaceut ical co mpany , or a compan y with many 
inven tions. He said that the r equest  by Mrs Foster’s lawyers t o remove the warranties 
was si mply put on the basi s that they were too complex and b urdensome for this kind 
of arrangement.  
104. I consider that Mrs Brake’s conclu sion, that the removal o f the warran ties showed tha t 
domain, websi te and  email accounts were exclu ded from the sale, does not fo llow 
from the premis es as a matter of either construct ion (in which it is indeed irrelevant) 
or logic. But secondly, and in any event , I do not accept her evidence  on this point . 
Instead, I fin d that neither Mrs Brake no r anyone on her be half or that of Mr s Foster 
so informed  Dr Guy. It is not simply that I prefer t he evidence of Dr Guy to that of 
Mrs Brake on this point (as I do). Or th at there is an absence of any suppo rting

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
28 
 evidence on the po int fro m M r Ryde-Weller as Mrs Foster’s solic itor (as there is) . He 
was ca lled, and  if it were true that he or someone in hi s team had told Dr Guy this I 
woul d have expec ted him to say so.  But he d id not.  More over, he confirmed  that Mrs 
Brake had never tol d him t hat Sarafina did not  own its own email  accounts, and nor  
did she te ll him th at she owned them. He said (and I accept)  that, if she had, he would 
have r egarded it a s a material matter to disc lose to the purchaser. It is t rue these things 
were not on the fix ed asset list. But D r Guy said that in  his experience su ch things 
would not be expected to be. I accept this.  
105. But, o ver and above these matters, it is  also such a n obvious thing, in selling  such a 
business in 2015, whic h had  no “passing trade”, but  instea d depended on positi vely 
attracting th e public, for the purchaser to have th e domain, the website and the email 
accou nts used by the business up until then. As Dr Guy said in cross -examinati on, the 
contrary proposition, that the purchaser would have been “untroubled” by not buying 
these things , is “nonsense ”. Indeed, in a brochure prepared by Mrs Brake t o seek 
refinancing from  Santander Bank in Septe mber 2015, it sa ys “90% of the business [is ] 
derived from the axnoller we bsite and the other 10% from a gency websites”. In c ross-
examination at the  trial Mrs Brake h owever denied that the goodwill of the busin ess 
was bound up in its  website and email addre ss. She insisted  it was bou nd up in its 
bricks and mortar.  
106. However,  I acc ept Dr Guy’s  evidence that Mrs  Brake  had explained to him before the 
purch ase that the main sourc es of business were oth er wedding sites which w ere 
linked to the  Axnoller website and Instagram accoun t. It is clear that , if you  do not 
have such things, the business is much less visible to the  public, and less attractive to 
invest ors. The interest of th e vendor lay in maximis ing the price, and, inde ed, Dr Guy 
appear s to have paid a very high price. If t here had been the s lightest  suggestion that  
the domain, t he website a nd the email accou nts were not included in the sale, I am 
certain that Dr Guy, a s an expe rienced purchaser o f commercial companies, would 
have notice d, and wou ld have queried it.  
107. Mr Ryde  Weller gave evidenc e (whic h I accept)  that he  did not re move the IP 
warranties  on the basis tha t the ema il acc ounts d id not belong to the company. I n my 
judgment, the  absence of those warranties  does not show that thes e things were not  
being sol d. Their a bsence was reasonably expla ined by Mr s Brake, and in term s 
which did not include “Oh, b ut these things ar e not include d”. In cross -examination 
Mrs Brake even said that  the fact of not telling Dr Guy about the non -inclus ion of the 
email accounts w as “de min imis. Nobody even thought a bout the e mail acco unts”, 
though a short time later in her c ross-exam ination s he ret racted this. 
108. I further find that Mrs B rake knew well at the trial that she was chang ing her story 
that Dr Gu y had been told, and that w hat she ha d said was not true. In add ition, I f ind 
that Dr Guy beli eved that he was buying not on ly the bu siness bu t also  the as sociated 
domain, the website an d the email accoun ts ba sed on that domain, and  that his belief 
was a r easonable one. Wh at was the  effect in law of the arrangements en tered into  is a 
different matt er, of course, and one to whic h I shall  return.  
109. After the pur chase of Sarafina, Chedington p rocured the change  of name of that 
company to AEL , which took place  on 18 Jul y 2017. Mr and Mrs Brake were 
employe d to conti nue the b usiness of hosting weddings and providing  short st ay 
luxury  accom modatio n. The same email accounts were  used in this busi ness as before,

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
29 
 based on the  “axnoller.co.uk” domain , and all hosted with Fasth osts. In particular, the 
accou nt with the addre ss enquiries @axnoller .co.uk  conti nued to be the primary 
account used by customers to co ntact the business, and  vice versa. It appeared  on the 
website. The claimants accept ed in their written opening that the hosting costs of the  
accounts were met by the third defenda nt at leas t from  Februa ry 2017 . 
110. In additi on to Mrs B rake, Simon Windus  also used the enq uiries ac count for the 
purposes of the business. There is no evidence that he did so f or pri vate purposes, and 
I find that he did  not. As I have already said, there was a question ma rk as t o whether, 
before going on mater nity leave in June 2016 , Rebecca Holt had  also used the 
account , but in c ross-exami nation Mrs Brake accepted tha t she did . Agai n there is no 
evidence that M s Holt used the account for private purposes , and I find she did not  do 
so. As befo re, howev er, Mrs Brake continued to use this accou nt also for her personal, 
non-business emails, as well as the account  with the addre ss alo@axnoller.co.uk . Mr 
Brake used the ac count with the  address andy@axnoller.co.uk . In May 2017 Mrs 
Brake also author ised Andrew Allen to provide Simon Windus with the password f or 
the accoun t with the address  “alo@”. She said that was becaus e that was when she 
began  medical treatment whi ch took h er out of the office.  
111. Dr Guy and the othe r directors of Chedington and AEL  left the management of the 
business in the ha nds of Mr s Brak e and the o ther employees, and did not use or  seek 
access to the enqu iries account. Nor did they ask Mrs Brake for the passwords to the 
Fastho sts or enquiries account . But Dr G uy and Mrs Brake discussed updating the 
website, an d Mr s Brake ne ver told Dr Guy  that the a xnoll er domain belonged to her 
personally, e ven though it woul d have been obvious  to her t hat he thought he had 
bought them along w ith the business.  
112. In cross -examination , Dr Guy accepted that he assumed that at this time Mrs Brake  
would ha ve pri vate emails  on the enquiries accoun t, because  of his pa st experience 
with staff in other com panies. H e also accepted that Mrs Brake would not want othe rs 
to see such private emai ls. The contracts of employment between Mr and Mrs Brake 
and the third defenda nt were for mal d ocuments negotiated  between the partie s at the 
time o f the sale and purchase  of Saraf ina. As originally drafted, they contained 
clauses  dealing with surveillance of empl oyees’ actions and privacy. In particular, 
they mad e clear that employe es had no e xpect ation of privacy in  relation to the us e of 
the employ er’s telephones, comput ers and e mail systems. However, these clauses 
were  deleted  by the time that the final version  was signed.  
113. In an email dated 14 February 2017 to her lawyers, Mrs Br ake explain ed th at she 
understood wh y Dr Guy used such clauses in med ical marijuana business,  but said 
that she was unhappy with this in the wedding business. The lawyers passed t his on to 
Dr Guy , who  also said in cross -examination  that Mrs Brake had told him that sh e 
thought it was “a bit h eavy -handed ”, altho ugh “she did n ot tell me why ”. 
Neverth eless, Dr  Guy accepted  the deletion  by email on 17 February 2017. The 
clauses whi ch were included (at [16] and [20]) are more limite d. Nonetheless,  there is 
an obl igation in clause 16 to “return … anything in your poss ession which b elongs to 
the Employ er … whic h contains … any confidential i nformation  … in whatever form  
… including comp uter program mes with rela ted storage media .” Clause 20 provides 
for Mrs Brake to consent to the processing of her  data (and sensitive da ta) by the thi rd 
defendant for the  purposes  of her employment.  I do not think that this l atter clause is 
of any significance in the context of this disp ute. However, I also do not consid er that

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
30 
 the del etion of dr aft clauses can be admissible evidence in re lation to the construction 
of what is left.   
Dismissal of the claimants  
114. Unfortunately, relations between Dr Guy and Mr and Mr s Brake deteriorated over 
time. It is said against he r, for e xample,  that Mrs Brake ref used to allow the dir ectors 
of AEL  access to company and management informa tion, and that  she also restricte d 
access to Axnoller House. I do not need to resolve any of that  in this claim . But t here 
was a stormy  meeting between them on 6  Nove mber  2018, w hich concluded bad ly, 
and o n 8 November 2 018 Mr and Mrs Brake were di smissed. They were given written 
notice expiring on 30 November 2018, with  garden leave i n the mea ntime, and 
payment in lieu of notice and holid ay pay thereafter. One thi ng that the letter did not 
do was t o ask Mrs  Brake for the  passwords to any of the var ious axnoller email 
accounts or the Fasthosts account.  
115. As a result  of the dismi ssal, howe ver, Dr G uy was very concerned about the enquiries 
account in particular, to whic h Mrs Brake still had access, and h e did not . This was 
AEL ’s main business email accou nt. He telephoned Mr Allen, who was still the 
administrator for the variou s IT accounts. But he sa id he could take instructions only 
from Mrs Br ake. Simon Windus informed  Dr G uy o f the no ndisclosure agreem ent 
betwe en Mrs Brake a nd Mr Allen. Dr Guy emailed Mr Allen at 21:36 that evening, 
referring to any nondisclosure agreement that there might be (but whose terms he had 
not then seen) as hav ing no val idity now  that Mrs B rake ha d been dismissed. L ater the 
same evenin g Mr Allen repl ied, sayin g that there was an agree ment , and that he would 
take legal advice.  
116. On the mo rning of 9 November 2018, Dr Guy telephoned, and subsequently visited , 
Mr Allen , and inst ructed hi m to chan ge all the passwords to th e Fasthosts account and 
associated em ail accounts so t hat Mr and Mrs Bra ke were no longer able to access 
them. I find that Dr Guy did not threaten to sue Mr Allen if he did not comply, but he 
did w arn h im that th ere might  be legal  implic ations. Mr Allen sa id he would take 
independent legal ad vice. I also find th at Dr Guy and Mr Allen did not discuss the 
question of intellectual property rights, despite the suggestion to the contrary in Mr 
Allen ’s second witness statement.  
117. On the sa me day,  Mrs Brake a sked Mr  Allen if she could come in to see him and 
discuss the ema il accounts, but he said he was seeking his own legal advice , and  had 
to refuse. She  then sent him an email saying:  
“the only thing I was going to get you t o do is to take my pers onal stuff o ff the 
business accounts an d anything on live drive  so you could go ahead and release 
the passwords and change them for them” . 
 It will be n oted that  this email makes no claim to ownership of the domain, the 
website or th e email accounts . Nor d oes it refer to the  2014 nondisclosure agreement 
between them.  It simply make s an understandable request for Mrs Brake’s own 
person al data. And, in an email to Dr Guy’s then lawyer, Rod McDonagh, on the 
same da y, she sai d:

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
31 
 “I hav e no interest in int erferin g with the axnoller  enquiries or staff emails, but I 
do not wa nt Guy or anyon e else at axnoller having any access to my private 
emails”. 
118. However, in a follow -up email to Mr McDonagh she added:  
“there are e mails  on this a ccount th at predate the creat ion of Sarafina Properties  
Ltd and Axnoller Ev ents Limited and they a re my husband a nd my private 
property”.  
I have already  found that no  such emails on the enquiries account  are now accessible, 
with one immater ial e xception . But it is  notable that , in th ese ema ils, Mrs Brake 
make s no ownership claim  to the Axnoller enquirie s account  from th e time of the 
incorporation of Sarafina, that is Jun e 2015 , and neither does she c omplain of any 
interference with the nondisclosure agreement.  
119. Mr Allen took independen t legal  advice, as he had said he would, and w as told that Dr 
Guy own ed the co mpany and its intelle ctual property rights and therefore he should 
compl y. He did so. The reafter, on 9 November 2018 Mr Allen  made backups of the 
axnoller accounts, to be k ept by  his so licitors, Humphreys  Kirk,  until the sit uation was 
resolved. Howe ver, it  appea rs from the (unchallenged) joint expert re port of Mr 
Black band of Grant  Thornton th at Mr Allen copied only the inbox  of the enquiries 
account, and not the outbox. Mr Allen also change d the pas sword  for the enquiries 
account, so that Mrs Brake  no longer had  access to it, but the def endants did . (I record 
that there was a gap of about 30 hours before access was switched off for Mrs Brake, 
but it is not clear if she took any ad vantage  of that.) 
120. Until  12 Novemb er 2018  Mr an d Mrs Brake continued to have access to the accou nts 
with t he alo@  and andy@  addresses . But o n that day,  Mr Allen  removed  access from 
the Fasth osts server and  migrated the ir contents to a portable fo rmat for Mr and Mr s 
Brake to take away. These  were  made a vailable to the Brakes or their solici tors on the 
same day, although  not co llected until la ter. The  defendants at no time had access to 
these acco unts or to any of the data in them, and Mr Allen d id not give  them a ny. T he 
suggestion in the B rakes’ openi ng skeleton at paragraph 8 that the de fendants have  
read, retain ed and shared such docu ments is on th e evidenc e before me ent irely 
without foundation . In particular , I acc ept Dr Guy’s explanation for  disclosing  the fe w 
documents that had been s ent to or fr om alo@axn oller.co.uk , that they must have 
come in to the defenda nts’ hand s through other  routes than retention b y the m. The 
defendants had no interest in these ac counts. At the same time AEL  would not hav e 
been able  to use the enquiries@axnoller.co.uk  account for its business, so it had to set 
up new ones. I d eal with this f urthe r below.  
121. On 13 Nove mber 2018 L abyrinth Co mputers Ltd became  administrat or of the 
enquiries a ccount in place of Mr Allen and hi s company. As administrator, that 
company was able to provide direct access to the enqu iries account to those 
authorised. It also made a copy of the enqui ries a ccount. The jointly instructe d expert, 
Mr Black band of Grant Thornton , found that this copy contained both the inbox  and 
outbox  of the account, and  also emails from other  ‘axnoller events’ email accounts . Dr 
Guy o riginally agreed wi th Simo n Windu s tha t the latter (as a trusted colleagu e of 
Mrs Bra ke’s) w ould go through the enquiries acco unt to remove Mrs Brake’s pe rsonal

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
32 
 emails. Mr Windu s was understa ndably uncomfortable with this, but in any event Mrs 
Brake objected, and it  did not happen.  
122. Dr Gu y said he would find an other way to solv e the proble m. In part icular, in le gal 
correspondence b etween the 9 N ovember 201 8 and 12 November 201 8, the 
defendants ’ solicitors on their behalf offered to give unsupervised access to Mrs 
Brake, subject to  her giving undertak ings as to not accessing, edi ting or deleting 
commercially sensitive information or business data a nd removing only her and her 
husba nd’s personal  information. But the undertakings requested  were not 
forthcoming . It should be noted that Mrs Brake’s positio n at this time was n ot that she 
owned the  accoun t. On the contrar y she accepted in an email to Mr Allen on 9 
November 2018 that it  was a busi ness a ccount; it wa s simply that she had some 
persona l material in  it, and wanted access to it .  
123. On 15 November 201 8 the claimants offered an un dertaking in  narrower terms than 
that requested by the defendants, and asked also for  a cross -undertaking and warranty 
from the  third defendant. On 21 November 2018 the defendants proposed different 
and simpler wording for the  claimant s’ undertaking s. That  was refused  by the 
claimants the same day , who insiste d on their own versions and the cross -undertaking 
and warranty . On 26 November 2018 the defendant s offer ed the claimants supervised 
access  as an al ternative.  This was re peated on 27 November. On 29 Nov ember 2018 
the claimants  returned to the question of un supervised access, but offering 
undertakings only on their own terms.  
124. The same  day, the defendants again offered supervised access to the account.  In 
response to a request  from the claimants, the defe ndants expla ined on 30 November 
2018 what would be invol ved in supervised access . On 3 December 2018 the 
claimants returned to ask for unsupervised access with undertakings. On 4 December  
2018, the defendants’ solicitors said t hat this w as no longer an opt ion. But o n 5 
December 2018 the defendants changed their  minds and agreed to this , subject to 
undertakings. However, on 12 December 2018 the claimants refused to give the 
undertakings  required  by the defendants , and proposed th eir own. On 17 December  
2018  the def endants re jected these. The claimants accordingly did n ot have access to 
the enquiries account.  
125. I find that the defendants wished as quick ly as possible to “purge” the enquiries  emai l 
account of the claima nts’ perso nal ema ils, so that the busin ess c ould move on . I also 
find that they had no intere st in or d esire to read  the claimants ’ personal emails. My 
own assessm ent, af ter hearing b oth Mrs Brake and Dr Guy, and read ing the relev ant 
documents, is that the defendants bent ove r backwards to accommoda te Mrs Brake, 
consistently with their busi ness needs and the d ata protection rig hts of third parties, 
but for  some reas on Mrs Brake was unw illing to agree  to any of the offe rs. I find th at 
the defendants’ actions in this reg ard were  appropriate and reasona ble, both in the 
making and in the withd rawing of  offers  of ac cess, especially in light of the fact that 
the claimants at that stage had made no claim  to the ownership of t he enquiries 
account. 
126. At the time Mr s Brake, and subsequentl y her solicitor s, made numerous complai nts 
that the d efendants were actin g unlawfully in denying the claimants a ccess to their 
personal emails in the e nquiri es account. So Dr  Guy was well aware of  the Brakes’ 
position. But I find on  the evidence that he ho nestly believed  that he was not acting

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
33 
 unlawfu lly in withdrawing the Brak es’ access to  what he reasonably believed was the 
company’s email account on thei r dismis sal. 
127. From 12 November 2 018, by her solicitors  Mrs Brake made v arious subject acce ss 
requests, and other requests for a ccess to the acco unt. She did this , not claiming to be  
its ‘owner’, but instead under data protection legislation, and for the pur poses of  a 
forthcoming disciplinary a ppeal heari ng re lating to th e Bra kes’ dismissal. At  the same 
time, she insisted that th e defendants should  not access, copy, t ransfer or r emove her 
personal emails or files in the account. It was not clear to D r Guy how  the def endants 
could res pond to the  subject access a nd other requests  without being able first to see  
the cont ents of the acc ount. He was also  mindfu l of the rights of third  partie s to da ta 
protection. There were many discussions between the two sides as to how t he subject 
access  request wa s to be satisfied  and, if searches were to be used, what keywords 
should be used in making  those searches.  
128. There wa s also a dispute between  the pa rties b ecause the defendants placed CCTV 
cameras at various points  on the A xnoller Estate. The Brake s complaine d that these 
infringed their data protection and GDPR rights. On 1 9 Decem ber 2018, the 
defendants’ solicit ors pr ovided the claimants wit h a link (limi ted to expire on 4 
January 20 20) to t he CCTV data, for them  to vie w or do wnload as  they wishe d. In 
relation t o the disciplinary appeal hearing, the appeals themselves were filed o ut of 
time, alth ough this was ext ended, and the hearing date origi nally fix ed o f 29  
November 201 8 was postponed  because of indis position on the p art of the Brakes. 
They were offered the opportunity to deal with the matter on paper, but this was not 
accepte d.  
129. In the meant ime, Dr Guy autho rised direct acces s to the enquir ies account i n 
November 20 18 via Labyrinth Computers  to his own s olicitors and to a direc tly 
instructed  barrister, Mr Martin Palmer, in relation to the actual or potenti al litigat ion 
in relation to claim s relating to employ ment, data protect ion and the c ontinued 
occupa tion by the Brakes o f Axnoller House. Both the solicit ors a nd Mr  Palmer began 
to re view th e accou nt from those points of view. Neither was instructed to loo k at 
purel y personal emails. Mr Pa lmer was as sisted by  his wife (who is not a lawyer)  in 
reviewing t he contents of the a ccount , under his supervision . 
130. In answe r to a request from Dr G uy’s so licitors of 17 December 201 8 to know on 
what basis they were entit led to the  data in the account, th e solicitor s for the  Brakes 
said in an  email on the  same day that data from before the  incorporation of Sarafina in 
June 2015 , “do es not belong to yo ur clie nt and is being unlawfully withheld”. This 
confirmed the view expr essed in a n em ail from Mrs Brake d ated 9 Nove mber 201 8, to 
which I have already refer red. The defend ants’ solicitors rep lied on 18 December 
2018 to say th at the pre -June 2015 emails “ must mo stly be  connected with Axnoller 
business. This is the business tha t is owned  by our client and is on  an email a ccount 
that has been paid f or by our cli ent.” In an ema il of 18 December 20 18, the claimants’ 
solicitors say, as to the pre-June 2015  data:   
“This is not your client’s data. It belongs entirely to our clients and does not  
form part of any purchase  of the fo rmer bus iness. The company  your client 
purchased was n ot in existence then, hence title has never been transf erred” .

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
34 
 131. In an email dated 4 D ecember  2018, the claimants ’ solicitors asked the defendants for 
all emai ls preda ting 2 June 2015, on the b asis that that was  when Sarafina was  
incorporated, and therefore  the preceding emails could be of no relevance to the 
defenda nts, and the defendants had no right t o them. The point was repeated in an 
email of 12 December 2 018. As I have already said, howev er, no one  now has  access 
to these e mails, except t he one dated 8 February 2015 from M r Culme -Seymour to 
Mrs Brake, whi ch app ears to be of no interes t to an yone. The question about these 
emails, if indeed there are any, is therefore ac ademic.  
132. As a precautio n, in December 20 18 Dr Guy registered a new do main, 
axnollerevents.co.uk. Initia lly the we bsite sim ply pointed to th e website at 
axnoller.co.uk , although there were a lso new email addresses using the  new d omain , 
because the old e nquir ies accou nt was the su bject of the disp ute with Mrs Brake. The 
new a xnoller webs ite (which had previou sly been d iscussed between Dr Guy an d Mrs 
Brake) we nt live in ea rly 2019.  
Allegations against Mrs Brake  
133. Some 10 days or so after the dismissal of the Br akes, Dr Guy received a  telephone 
call from William D’Arcy, the former hus band of Mrs Brake. Mrs B rake ha d in fa ct 
obtained employment for hi m by Che dingt on at a prope rty which i t owned  in Spain . 
He allege d that  Saffron Foster had never been the true owner  of Sarafina, and that Mrs 
Brake ha d been behind it all. Mr D’Arcy further  told Dr Guy that eviden ce supp orting 
these allegations could be ob tained f rom s omeone called  Bruce Barc lay in 
Switzerla nd. In pass ing, I  note that Mr Barclay is referred to in the bu ndle. T here is an 
emai l exchange betwee n Mrs Brake and Bruce Barclay on 29 July 2015, in which Mrs 
Brake says “It may intere st you to know  that we have c ompleted the deal!!!” The 
email goes on to t alk abo ut the site havi ng “huge po tentia l” for development,  and 
offering “to host ” him there in th e future. Mr Barclay r eplied “Congratulat ions. Well 
done”.  These emails were not put to Mrs Brake i n cross -examination , and the refore I 
do not have the benefi t of he r expla nation of  them.  I draw no conclusions from th em. 
134. Having received th e information that Mr Barclay might be able to supply info rmation, 
Dr Guy cont acted him, and was appar ently s upplied  with some docu mentary 
evide nce. Dr G uy became concerned fr om this  materi al that t here might have b een 
wrongdoing by M rs Brake. However, he told me – and I a ccept – that he  
“didn ’t for one minute i magine that there wo uld be other evidence of  this 
wrongdoi ng sitting in t he company’s email acc ount.”  
He went on to s ay – and I fur ther acce pt – that  
“I sti ll did not imagine that Mrs Brake would h ave left any evid ence in the 
company’s email accounts of w rongdoing.”  
135. As I have said, access to the enquiries accoun t was pro vided to the defend ants’ 
solicitors for their review. This showe d that th e account c ontain ed more than 70,000  
emails from 15 August  2015 to 8 Novemb er 2018. After obtaini ng details of the 
Brakes’ advisers, the  defendants’ solicitors found t hat in that account, o f those 
70,00 0+ emails , there were some 2209  emails  betwee n the Bra kes and tho se adv isers. 
I find that the purpose of this re view was to enabl e the defendants to de al with the

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
35 
 litigat ion or contemplated litigation concerning th e Brakes’ empl oyment, their d ata 
protectio n rights and the property posse ssion c laims. Although lawyers had  acces s to 
the account, t he defendants ’ own sta ff did not.  
136. Howev er, on about 2 January  2019, Dr Guy first  looked for himself at the enquiries 
account  (throu gh dire ct access from Labyrinth Com puters) i n order to familiarise  
himsel f with other asp ects of the  busin ess. But, as he put  it (and I accept) in his oral 
evidence , he  
“stumbled across  … a number of emai ls that corroborated  entirely what I had 
been told by Mr B arclay beforeha nd”. 
137. However,  he made clear that he did not look at  person al emails  relating t o Mrs Brake, 
such as thos e in connection with h er health, member s of her family, or ot her personal 
matter s. The only purpose for which he accessed th e accou nt was to familiarise 
himself with the busin ess, but (once he had establi shed th at there might be 
informat ion relating to Mrs  Brake’s wrongdoing) a lso to see what s uch evidence there 
was, not only in relat ion to that wrongdoi ng, but in particular in  relati on to t he 
ongoing liti gation with t he Brakes , such as the employme nt clai m, and the posse ssion 
claim . I ac cept this evidence.  I do not accept that Dr Guy deliberate ly read any email 
with a view to discover ing personal informa tion relating to Mr or M rs Brak e. I fi nd 
that, where Dr Guy looked  at an em ail and found that it related  to per sonal mat ters 
that d id not  concern his compan y or his business, he did not read it f urther. I further 
find that Dr Guy never had any interest in the Brakes’ purely perso nal inf ormatio n. 
138. I also accep t that his in struction s to his lawyers were to find  and no te materi al which 
related to the business, an d not to find material  which was person al to Mr and Mrs 
Brake . It is in the natu re of such an exerci se that, in deciding whe ther a particu lar 
document re lates to the business or is purely personal,  some e lements  of the d ocument 
must be r ead and understood.  I accept that Dr Guy and those advisin g him did not 
read fur ther than they need ed to in order to es tablish that documents w ere of a 
perso nal rather than  a business n ature.  However, if they conside red tha t it wa s an 
emai l which con cerned  the business, then  they read on.  
Dispute over the axnolle r domain  
139. In July 201 9, two months before the commenceme nt of th is litigation, Mrs Brake 
contac ted S imon Deverell o f 0404 Crea tive, w ho had registered it originally i n 2009 
on her in structions , but w as named as the reg istrant with Nominet. Thereafter, in 
September 2019 she pro cured  the registratio n of the axnol ler doma in in her own 
name, in place of  him. A dispute is p ending unde r the N omin et dispute resolution 
system as to w hether sh e was enti tled to  be so registered. That dis pute is stayed  
pending the outc ome of this litigati on. The website on th e axnoller dom ain appe ars to 
have become inaccessible  to the public in Oc tober 2019.  Exactl y wh y that happened 
does not matt er for present p urposes. B ut, as a result , the axnol lerevents domain 
becam e the primary dom ain for the business w ebsit e. 
Contact bet ween Dr Guy, Mrs Brehme and Mr Swift  
140. After the dismissal of the Brakes (b ut not before ) there w as conta ct be tween Dr Guy 
and D uncan S wift, the Brakes’ truste e in bankruptcy. It came about in this wa y. Dr

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
36 
 Guy was put in touch with  Lorraine  Brehme through  a mutual acquaintance. She 
initiated a meeting, at which sh e recommended  his meeting both the liquidat or of  Stay 
in Style and  the tr ustee i n bankruptcy.  Dr  Guy agreed, and a meeti ng was set up. Dr 
Guy’s email telling S imon Lowe s (the liquida tor of Stay in  Style) that he would be  
delighted to meet  is dated 30 Novem ber 2018. Tha t was a reply  to Mr Lo wes’ email 
confirming their own  contac t, by t elephone that mor ning. The meeting with M r Swift 
was fixed f or 7 December 2018. Mrs Brehme app ears to have attended as well.  
141. The meeting was  conc erned largely with chattels. I t did not dis cuss the owne rship of 
the axnol ler enquiries account o r the a xnolle r domain or websi te. Mr Swift raised with  
Dr Guy the questio n of the sale to th e defendants of the Stay  in Style chattels, and als o 
the Stay in Style domain and its related ema il accounts a nd website.  This was referred 
to in a n email  from Mr Swift to his lawyer dated  9 Dece mber 2 018, and another email 
from Mr Swift ’s lawyer to Dr Guy of 10 December 2018 . However, this  was not 
pursued because Dr Guy was no t interested in the Stay in St yle b rand,  believi ng that 
with the purch ase of Sarafina he had bought th e axnol ler br and (includin g do main, 
website  and related email accounts). In partic ular, I find that  Dr Guy did not a sk Mr 
Swift w hether he could buy any o f the axnoller domain, website  or email accounts .  
142. At Mrs Bre hme’s req uest the defenda nts’ lawyers in June 2019 sent her s ome em ails 
relevant to her, but none that was purely personal to Mrs Brak e. Mrs Brehme was not 
given access  to the account. The defendants’ lawyer s selected w hich docume nts were 
sent to her. Howe ver, Mrs Brake was no t informed that any m aterial had been sent to 
Mrs Brehme.  
143. Dr G uy told Mr Swift by email dated 18 Janua ry 2019 tha t boxes of files apparently 
belong ing to the Brakes had been found at the  cottage by his staff. On the same d ay, 
Mr Swift instructed an agent t o collect and se curel y store tho se file s, giv ing 
instructions that they were not i nspected or reviewed  until the court decided what 
should be done with them. There were 34 boxes in total . The truste e in bankru ptcy 
justifie d his actions  under section 311 of  the Insolvency Act 1 986. I find  that t he 
defendants did nothi ng in relation to th e boxes except to in form the tr ustee of their 
presence in the cot tage. In particular, they did not “stea l” them, or interfere w ith or 
review  them. 
Use of  a press a gent and pu blic relations lawyers  
144. Subsequently Dr Guy asked Mr Palmer t o supply a press agent  (Mr Jonathan 
Hawk er), who had been engaged  to advise,  with some in formatio n from th e account. 
This came about be cause  a number  of allegatio ns had been m ade in national 
newspapers in March 2019 against Dr Guy, w hich Dr Guy belie ved to h ave come 
from the Br akes. Dr Guy decided  to deal wit h these allegations by  seeking the advice 
of a press agent and specialist public relations lawy ers (Harbottl e and Lewi s). I deal 
with this in more det ail later. The defendants did not however tell t he claim ants 
before hand th at this was being done . 
The claim to ownership of the enquiries accou nt 
145. It is a curious feature of this case that n o claim wa s made on behalf of Mrs Brake  to 
the ownership  of the enquir ies account unt il Au gust 2019, just bef ore th is litig ation 
was commence d. Her solicitors wrot e to the defendant s’ solicitors on 5 August 201 9

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
37 
 to deal with an aspect of the disclosure pro cess in ot her, exist ing pro ceedings  between 
the parties . That letter s aid that the ac count  had been set up by  Mrs B rake bef ore the 
incorporat ion of Sarafina. It as serted Mrs Brake’s privacy in relation to her p rivate  
emails in the account, but did not clai m ownershi p of it. A  letter  in reply fr om the 
defendant s’ solicitors t o claimant s’ solicitors of 23 August 20 19 sai d that t he account 
was an asset of the third def endant’s business , and that the second defendan t owne d 
the third  defendant . It went on in some detail t o deny var ious factu al asse rtions in th e 
letter of 5 August 2019. The claimant s’ solicitors replied two days later, on 23 A ugust 
2019, and for the first time asserted Mrs Brake’s claim to ownership of the axnol ler 
domain and the other axnoller email accoun ts. Ten da ys later, the cla im form in t his 
claim was issued.  
146. The amend ed particulars of cl aim at [21] allege that, despite the acqu isition of West 
Axnoll er Farm by Sarafina in 2015, Mrs Brake retained and used the ax noller email 
accounts as her own. At [22 ] they all ege, corre spondin gly, that Mr s Brake did not sell 
the domain s or the accoun ts to  Sarafina. And at [ 28] t hey alleg e that a ll the 
information in the enquiries account was pri vate and confidential to the  Brake s except 
as to Mrs Brake’s use of it as an agent f or “AEL” ( which I  assume is i ntended to refer 
to Sarafina on ce sold to Ched ingto n), and that the Br akes had reaso nable ex pectations 
of privacy and confidentiality.  
147. In the bu ndle there is a copy of an undated  complaint made by Mr and Mrs Brake to 
the Informa tion Commi ssione r’s Office ab out data protection breaches a llegedly 
committ ed by  the defendants , including the release o f personal data (or ac cess to it) to 
a range of pers ons including “legal firms involve d in the dispute” and “the courts”.  
Internal infor mation shows that it postdate s 28 March 2019. It was filed on 29 August 
2019.  It appears that th is copy  of the c omplaint was passed by the ICO  to the 
defendants for thei r comments. The first sentence  of parag raph 3 of this complaint 
says 
“During the course of our em ployme nt, much of o ur personal data was 
retained on the serv ers of AEL  and CC EL – specificall y emails on the 
enquiries@axnoller.co.uk , alo@axnoller .co.uk and andy@axnoller.c o.uk 
account s.” 
148. Mrs Brake’s evidence  was th at she di d not sign the document , she d id not write it, and 
that t he first sentence of paragraph  3 was wr ong. I accept that this complaint may well 
have been draft ed by Mrs Brake’s l awyers for her, rather than by  herself. It was p ut to 
Mrs Brake tha t her s olicitors  would n ot have submitted it t o the ICO without her 
seein g it first. Mrs Brake’s respon se to thi s (whic h I set out earlier) was simply  
bluster, which did not an swer th e ques tion. I find that she was sent a copy  of the 
complaint to review be fore it  was sent  to the ICO. It would be good practice by 
lawyers  to do so , as much to protect themselv es as the ir client, and it would be in 
keeping  with Mrs B rake’s gen eral a pproach to bu siness m atters  to wish to review it 
before it was sent . Accordingly, I hav e no doub t that s he saw a nd approved th is 
wording.  I add th at I have not seen the decision of th e ICO on this complaint, but I 
understand from  Dr Guy’s e vidence th at it ruled that th ere was a lawful purpose in  
providing  the contents of these accounts to th e defenda nts’ lawyers and  to the court.  
Disclosure of information from the enquiries account to third par ties

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
38 
 149. The defendants pro vided informati on from th e enquirie s acco unt in Novemb er 2018 
to their solicitors  Radius Law and directly instructed counsel M artin Palme r, and i n 
about June 2019 t o their late r solicitors Stewarts Law . The solic itors had  access to 
both the Al len copy and the  Labyrinth  copy . Mr Palme r had a ccess only to the l atter.  
The solicitors and Mr Palm er also shared the em ails from the enquir ies accou nt with 
counsel instructed in specific legal proceedings for the defendants . These coun sel 
were Andrew Sutcliffe QC, William  Day, Edwin J ohnson QC , Niraj Modha,  Robert 
Bowker, Alex Halban  and Philip Roberts  QC. In all these cas es documents were 
provided to  these a dvisers for the pur poses of the legal proceedings in which they 
were individual ly instructed, and hel d subject to the usual dutie s of confi dential ity of  
members of t he bar. I understand that e ach of the coun sel conce rned has confirmed 
that there ha s been n o further disseminatio n.  
150. I should sp ecifically mention the case of Mr Palmer. He was  instructed by direct 
access . Apparent ly, he has a sec ondary re sidence close to  Dr Guy , and they know 
each other . That canno t make any  difference as to th e proprie ty of di sclosing 
documents to him for the purposes of his professional advice , or th e degree o f 
confidentiality imposed upon him as a result . It al so appear s that his wife ( who is no t 
legally qualified) assisted him i n reviewin g the enquiri es acco unt for t he purpo ses of 
his advice. I h ave no doubt that she was well aware that the contents of  this a ccount 
were confidential and not to be  disseminated f urther.  Given that she had  access t o the 
account under the  supervision  of her hu sband, a qualified b arrister,  and onl y for the 
purposes of assisting him in his work, the fact that she is not herse lf a qualified lawyer 
is in my judgment irrel evant. She was and is in the  same positio n as any  unqualified 
fee earner in a firm of solicit ors, working under  the directio n of the  qualified staff.  I 
am satisfied that she has not disseminated any of the infor mation further.  
151. As I have said, limited information was also  provided to Jonathan  Hawk er, the pres s 
agent, and to Harbottle and Lewis, p ublic relations lawyers , for the purpose of 
advising the d efend ants on medi a issues dur ing the period when information w as 
published in the national press making allegations agains t Dr Guy . These allegation s 
included on e that Dr Guy had threatened to kill the claimants ’ horses. T his was 
published  in the national press  on 31 March 2019 . But the  news stories referred to a 
letter written by the defendant s’ solicitors  some four months e arlier, at th e beginning 
of December 2018 to  the claimants , apparently  giving them 96 hours to rem ove their 
horses from the defendants ’ property. So far as I can tell, this letter  is not in the pa pers 
before me , and I am unable to ascertain the circumstanc es or the wor ds used.  In the 
claimant s’ chronology prepared for the trial , the following statement a ppear s under “3 
December 201 8”: 
“Dr Guy  writes letter through solicitors threatening to shoot th e horses stabled 
at the farm if the Brakes do not move them within 96 hou rs.” 
152. The trut h or falsity of th is allegation  was not an issue before me, and I say noth ing 
about  that. However,  in the face of  this allegatio n published in the national media only 
after some thr ee months had elapsed from when  the letter concerned was written , I 
can well  understand w hy it was tho ught desirable for the defendants to engage a press 
agent and sp ecialist lawyers to  advise them . The information supplie d to the press 
agent and the lawyers was however f or self -briefing, and not for further 
dissemination.  There i s no evidence  that it was dissemin ated further , and I find that i t 
was no t.

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
39 
 153. On about 15 No vember 2018, the de fendants through their solicitors instructed Gillian 
Craik, a human resources adviser, to investigate allegations of potential misconduct 
by the cl aimants durin g the course of their employme nt. No documents from the 
enqu iries account wer e disclosed to her for this purpose. However, some documents 
sent by Mrs Brake from  the enquiries account to Dr Guy ’s own email account were 
supplied to her . Obviousl y they would not have been  private or co nfidential to Mrs 
Brake as agains t Dr Guy.  
154. In Febr uary 2019 the defen dants further instructed Lorna Townsend, another human 
resources  expert (and indeed a q ualified solicitor) to prepare a report on suspected 
miscond uct by the cl aimants durin g the ir employment. However, no emails from the  
enquiries accoun t were provided to her and neither did she have access to the account . 
However she was provided with some email s sent by Mrs Brake from the enquiries 
account to Dr Guy ’s email acco unt or that o f the bookkeeper Jo  Hague.  Again, these  
would n ot have been pri vate or co nfidential  to Mrs Brake as against Dr Guy.  
155. Lawyers acting for the Brakes ’ trustee in ban kruptcy, Mr Swift , wrote  to Dr and Mrs 
Guy on 20 March 2019  to reques t the supply of informatio n, and referred to  the 
trustee ’s being  “entitle d under section 366 of the Insolvenc y Act to r eceive from any 
person information that t hey have i n relation to the bankrupt s or their dealings, affa irs 
or property”. It does not appea r that at  any time a n order was made  requiring any of 
the defendants to c omply with such a request under sect ion 366 of th e Ins olvency Act 
1986.  However, Dr Guy ’s instruct ions to his legal team  were to do what was 
necessary to respond . As a r esult , they sh ared certain documents wit h Mr Swift , 
namely , the 202 documents from the enquiries accoun t listed in appendix  B to Dr 
Guy’s Affidavit of 16 December 2019 . 
156. In June 2019 , following a specific reques t by Lorraine Brehme for information 
concerning the  involvem ent of a particular accoun tant in matters concerning the 
claimant s’ bankr uptcies, Martin Palmer supplied some  67 emails to her from the 
enquiries account, as set out in appendix A to Dr Guy ’s Affi davit of 16 December 
2019 . Dr Guy ’s evidence is that he unde rstands that some of these  documents were 
referred to  at a court hearing on 10 June 2019,  before Mr Jarvis QC . 
157. A number of documents from the enquiries account have been deployed in court 
proceedi ngs, either by being ex hibited to witness statements on beha lf of the 
defendants or by  being disclosed in the proceedings to the clai mants as part of  the 
disclosure proc edure. The former disclosures are set out in paragraphs 33 to 40 of  Dr 
Guy’s Affidavit of 16 December 2019 , and the latter at paragraphs 41 to 44 o f the 
same af fidavit . 
The impact of disclosure on the  claimants  
158. Mrs Brake gave written ev idence about the imp act on her  of what she claims to be the 
misu se of her confid ential information  and the breach of her priv acy by the 
defen dants . I am satisfied that  she has been  both distres sed and embarrassed by what  
has happened. Ho wever, I do not acc ept that the degree of distress and embarras sment 
is as great as  she makes out. First of all, she assumes t hat everyone on th e defendant s’ 
side, including all members of their lega l teams , has read everything. I do not a ccept  
this. Secon dly, I am sati sfied  that Dr Guy and his  advisers have approache d the 
difficult task  of working out what to do with the informa tion they came acr oss with an

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
40 
 appreciation of the sensitivit y of what the y were doing , and a desire to respect th e 
rights of other s, including Mrs Br ake. Thirdly, I do n ot accept that the defen dants and 
their adv isers have delibe rately disclosed private or  confidential info rmation about 
Mrs Brake to third  parties f or the purpos e of distress ing or embarrassing  her.  
159. Moreover, it must be borne in mind th at in our system the  default position is tha t 
justice is done in  public. This public aspect is not however there for the d electation or 
enjoy ment of members of the pub lic, or for t he media to b e able to make money by 
selling the informat ion as “news ”. It is there to ensure th e quality and impartiali ty of 
justice. There  must theref ore necessarily be an element o f disclosure of ot herwise 
private or confidential informatio n in vindicat ing rights wh ich have been infringed . 
There are exception s, and indeed durin g the course of the trial of this claim I sa t in 
private at cert ain points. But the fact remains that some exposure of privat e life is 
almost  inevitable when parties litigate about  the breakdow n of a relationship, whethe r 
busine ss, emplo yment or purely per sonal. Lawyers on bo th sides will see docume nts 
disclosed  to the m (under an obli gation of confidentiality) which would not ot herwise 
see the light of day , and some of those documen ts may be inc luded in the hearing or 
trial bundle and then referred to in op en court. In my ju dgment, none of this is in itself 
actionable.  
160. Mrs Brake needs  to show somethin g over an d above this . But I am not satisfied  on the 
material before me that she h as done so , apart from the modest distress and 
embarrassment c aused to her by the knowledge tha t persons who wer e never intended 
to read her private correspo ndence have done so. I sho uld also add that this is not the 
kind of case where celebri ties have had  their mobile  telephones hacked , or their 
privacy otherwise in vaded,  so that p rivate informatio n could be publis hed in national 
and inter national media  for profit.  The Brakes  are enti tled to their privacy, but they 
are not celebrities. The pub lic will not be very inter ested in their private information. 
They do not h ave a ‘brand ’ to be damaged ( cf the model Naomi Ca mpbell , for 
example ). Nor indeed was any of the information le aked to o r published in the media.  
This is , at best , a case of limite d damage to t he claimants.  In the restricted contexts in 
which disclosures have been made, I consider that no re asonable person of ordinary 
sensibilities would be substantially offended.  
161. In addition, Mrs Brake  says that she has spent enormous legal costs i n other litigation 
which would not have happened if Dr Guy had initially pe rmitted her to r etrieve h er 
persona l information from the acc ount, and claims these as special damages . I accept 
that she  has spent large sums of mon ey in legal costs, but I do not accept th at this is 
all to  be laid at the doo r of the defendan ts. As I have  already held, t he offers which 
were made by the defendants t o permit th e claimants to have access to their personal 
information in the account were reasonable and appropriate at th e time, but t he 
claimants chose not to take t hem up, i nstead s eeking to imp ose u nreasonable  
conditions.  In any e vent, if the claimants w in their litiga tion, they  can expect to be 
awarded their leg al costs of that litigation. But if th ey lose a claim (where  there is 
claimants or def endants), and are ordered to  pay the other side ’s costs , they can not 
normally seek to recover those costs (or indeed their ow n) as dama ges in some  other 
claim.  
162. The claima nts additionally say in their closing submissions that they have suffered  a 
loss under  Art 6 of the ECHR by being deprived of a copy  of the emails in t he 
enquiries accoun t whilst the defendants we re litigat ing against them in relation  to

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
41 
 those emails.  They  accept, however that, since they were provided with a copy after 
the Nov ember 2019 he aring, there is no continu ing loss under this head. For my part , 
in these circumstan ces I do not see how they have suffered any compensable loss at 
all. They have prepare d for the tria l, having had the emails for a lmost a  year, and 
fought  it with their ful l ben efit. If they  win their claim, their only  loss is any extra  
costs they can prov e, but these would form pa rt of any costs award in their favo ur. If 
they lose, again their only loss is being put to extra costs at an early stage , and this ca n 
be taken in to account in any costs award made by the cour t. 
163. Lastly, under th is head, I  record t hat there was no evidence before me of any los s 
occasion ed to Mr Brake by any misuse o f confid ential informatio n or breach of 
privacy that might b e proved by h im against th e defendants.  As a resul t, I find that 
there i s no such loss.  
Identifying d ocuments  
164. It is neces sary to bear in  mind that this is a claim for final injunctive relief, including 
the destruction of documents. It is there fore important to b e able to descen d to detail. 
If the claimant s do not make out a case  for a n injunctio n in rela tion to a specific 
email, I cannot make that order, unless the defendants agree , or the court d ecides,  that 
it is t o be governed by the case o f another email  or group of emails in relation t o 
which injuncti ve relief  has also been agreed or decided . As I ha ve already  said, thi s 
case does not concern emails in any account using the enquiries@axnoller. co.uk  
address befo re August 2015 b ecause, with one t rivial exce ption, there are none sh own 
to be in the hands of the defend ants (or anyone else).  
165. At or before the hearing before Mr Jarvis QC in N ovember 2019 , the pa rties agreed a 
mechanism for reviewing the emails in the enquiries account . In his ju dgment, the 
judge said : 
“21. (2) … It wa s not in dispute that some of those docum ents would be purely  
business documents which belonged to AEL and that they should be retained 
by AEL. It was also not in d ispute that some would be confidential,  private 
emails bel onging to the Br akes. Where t hat line should be drawn  could only be 
decided  by examination of t he particu lar docume nts, a course which could not 
practically be carried out by the  court. The parties have agreed a mec hanism 
for dealing wit h these documents …” 
But all that wa s in the cont ext, and for the  purpose s, of an interim  injun ction 
application,  where the evidence before the court is normally written,  rather than a full 
trial, where it is usually oral.  
166. I note  also the commen ts of the C ourt of Appeal in Imerman v Tchengu iz [2011] Fam  
116, [78]: 
“How ever, at least in the written submissions made on behalf of the 
defend ants in the Queen’s Bench Division appeal,  it was contended that, until 
Mr Imerman had specifically identified the documen ts which contained 
confidential information, and  the grounds for  claiming confidentiality, his  
claim in confidence  should be  rejected.  No authority has been cited to support 
the proposition that , in every case  where i t is said that br each of con fidence

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
42 
 has occurred, or is th reatened, in relation to a nu mber of document s, the 
claimant must, as a mat ter of law, identify  each and every docu ment for which 
he claims confidence, and why. In some cases,  that may be an  appropr iate 
requirement,  for instan ce where a claimant is seeking  to enjoin a former 
employee from using some,  but not all, of the informati on the latter obtain ed 
when in  the claim ant's employment, as in  Lock International plc v 
Beswick  [1989] 1 WLR 1268,  page 12 74B. However, in the present  case, the 
imposition of such a requirement  is unnecessary (as it is obviou s that many, 
probably most, of  the documents are c onfidentia l or conta in confidential 
information), disproportionate (because of t he sheer quanti ty of do cuments 
copied), and unfair on Mr Imerm an (in the light of  the number o f documents 
copied, a nd the fact  that the copying was done wit hout his knowledge, let 
alone his consen t). It is oppressive and verging on the absurd to suggest th at, 
before he c an obtai n any equitable r elief, Mr I merman must  identify which out  
of 250,000 ( let alone which out o f 2.5 milli on) docu ments is or is not 
confidential or does or  does not contain co nfidential information. ” 
167. Those comments too were  made in the co ntext of an interloc utory appeal agai nst the 
decisio n of Ea dy J to grant summa ry judgment to the claimant o n a c laim to res train 
the defendants from comm unicating  the conten ts of his confidenti al documents to 
third parties and requiring the delivery up of those docume nts. They were not made a t 
a trial or on  an app eal from a trial.  I do not read the se comments a s mea ning that i t is 
never necessary to look a t the individual documents. But it shows  that in some  cases 
(particularly for interlocutory purposes) it is not nec essary t o do so. Each case must 
turn on its fac ts. 
Review mechanism  
168. As I have said , a review mechanism  was instituted  by the ord er of Mr Jarv is QC. That 
mechanism has been implem ented, at least to some exten t, although there have  
inevitably been disputes a bout it. Both Mrs Brake a nd Mr Spendlove g ave evidence 
about thi s, and both were c ross-examined  before  me. The eviden ce of Mrs B rake was 
more general, and in round numbers, compa red to tha t of Mr Spendlove, which was 
more detailed and m ore prec ise, but the re are nevertheless some  points of compari son. 
Mrs Brake said th at there were abou t 63,000 emai ls in the enquiries ac count, and that 
the clai mants accepted that “around 35000 ” of the email s in it were business emails, 
and not private or con fidential.  She s aid that the defendants accepted  that “around 
5000 ” should be de leted  as private a nd confidenti al. Mr Spendlove sa id that there 
were 62,524 e mails, and that the claimants had actually accepted 33,528 emails (about 
60%) as business related . He fu rther said  that the d efendants had initially accepted  
that 3,878 emails, and later a further 1 ,633 emails, to talling  5,511 emails in all (about  
9%), should be deleted. Beyond that  point, howeve r, agreeme nt was less obvious.  
169. Deducting 33,528 from 62,524 leaves  28,999 emai ls which were initially c laimed by 
the cla imant s to be private . After further revie w, in October  2020, the claimant s 
divided thes e 28,999 emai ls into three categories. The first consisted o f 13,464 emails 
(Mrs Brake said “about 13,500 emails ”) which the cla imants co ntinued to insis t were 
private. A s I have said, the def endan ts finally ac cepted that 5 ,511 of these were 
indeed private . Deducting 5 ,511 from 13,464 leaves some 7 ,953 of th e 13,464 a s still 
disputed. Mr Spendlove says in his evidence that  the dispute d number is 7,998. I am 
not clear why there  is a difference  of 45  betw een these two  numbers . The  second  of

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
43 
 the three c ategories put forward by  the claimants consisted of 4 ,338 emai ls which 
were now accepted by the claimants as business emails , and no longer claim ed to be 
private . It is not necessary  to say anything furth er ab out this cate gory. 
170. Deducti ng the 13,464 of the first catego ry and the  4,338 of the second category from 
the in itially claim ed 28,999, leaves a third category of 11,197  emails . In a letter from 
the claimant s’ solic itors to the defe ndant s’ solicitors of 6 Oct ober 2020  the claimant s’ 
solicito rs said that th ese emails  
“are extreme ly difficult to categorise and most a re emails bet ween the two 
parties which means it is disproportiona te to have a  dispute. Our clients wil l 
seek a variatio n to the order of Mr J arvis  QC such that  neither they  nor yo ur 
clients need  to delete their copies of these ”.  
The defendants accordingl y understood,  in my view not unreasonably, that the 
claimants were  abandoning their claim to a  permanen t injunction agai nst the  
defendants in respect of these 11,197 documen ts. That howe ver prove d to be  a 
mistaken assum ption. I will come back to this categ ory. 
The claimants ’ first category: 13,464 emails  
171. I return  to the first of the  claimant s’ three categories, that is, 13,464  emails claim ed to 
be pr ivate.  As I s ay, the defen dants a ccept that 5,511 of them ar e private  and shoul d 
be deleted , leaving 7 ,953 (or 7 ,998) in dispute.  Of the documents in dispute , the 
defenda nts clai m to be enti tled to ret ain 3149 emails as business emails,  and 4 ,849 
emails as evi dence of alle ged w rongdoin g by th e claimants (3,149 and 4 ,849 total 
7,998). The d efendants say ( in an overa rching  submission  applying to the whole 
account ) that th e claim ants had  no reasonab le expectation  of con fidentiality or priv acy 
in the account  at all , and fail at the out set on that basis. But , subject  to that, they d o 
not d efend the retention a nd use of t he 4,849 emails on an y basis other than the 
“iniqui ty de fence ”. I will d eal with eac h part of the disputed documents separately.  
172. The first part  of the residual cate gory: As to the  first part of the residual cate gory 
(which Mr  Spendlov e says amount to  3,149 emails) , both Mr s Brake and Mr 
Spendlove g ave written evidence . Mr Spe ndlove set o ut sub categories of do cuments 
in this category , and adduced reasons f or assi gning each subcateg ory to  the class o f 
documents which  were busines s emails, not privat e or con fidential to the claimants. In 
her evidence, Mrs B rake challenges the def endants ’ categoris ation of emails as 
business emails as containing “obvious error s”. However, the examples which she 
gives d o not appear to re late to the 3 ,149 ema ils, because the de scriptions d o no t 
correspond. For e xample , she refers to 640 emails re gardi ng the 
administrati on/liquidation o f Stay in Style.  But these do not appear in th is subcategor y 
according t o Mr Spendlove. On  the other hand, he has 782 em ails in t he second  
subcatego ry of 4 ,849 emai ls, which he says r elate to di sputes be tween the Brakes an d 
PWF. I do not kno w, because this was not explored before me, whether the 640 
emails refer red to by Mrs Br ake were among tho se 782 emails.  But, if they we re, they 
would fall into the  second su bcategory  of 4,849 emails . 
173. It is also correct (as defendants say ) that none of these 3,149 emails in  the first 
subcategory  was put to Dr Guy, and only two of them to Mr Spe ndlove. As to th ese 
two documents,  the first was  an email  between Mrs Brake and Andrew Allen  in which

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
44 
 Mr Al len asked whet her Mrs Brake wanted to carr y on with th e stay instyleuk.com 
domain. Mr Spendlove accepted that this was not a n AEL  business  email.  He als o 
accepted that an em ail between M rs Brake and Mrs Foster after the sale  of Saraf ina 
was not an AEL  business email either.  He further a ccepted t hat the review  exercise 
could be refined so as to exclude em ails of this kind which ha d been  miscategori sed. 
The parties did not agree  that the se two emails  could  be taken to be rep resentative of 
all 3,149 em ails, and I do not accept t hat they nec essarily w ould be. I would expect  
counsel  to pick the  strongest examples to put to the  witne ss firs t.  
174. Although no in dividual docu ment s from this subcategor y were put to  Dr Gu y, certain  
descript ions of documen ts were put to Dr Guy in cross -examination . He accepted in a 
general sense  (but without reference to any documents) that, if the emai ls wer e not  
AEL busin ess emails , they were priva te emails. This is not conclusiv e. The de fence 
subm its that there was no  reasona ble expectation of privacy , and no  confidentia lity, in 
the enq uiries account. I did not understand Dr Guy ’s answer to be abandon ing that  
prim ary submission. He als o said tha t emails betwee n the Brakes and their truste es in  
bankruptcy we re private emai ls, apart f rom the “iniquity defence ”. He also acce pted 
that emails betwee n the Brakes and their lawyers were private. But documents with 
these de scriptions are not inc luded in t he first subcat egory of 3,149 emails accordin g 
to Mr Spendlove ’s evidence .  
175. The defendants  in closing  accept that it i s not necess ary to cover each indiv idual email 
of those remaining in disp ute in cross -examination  or eviden ce. But they submit  that 
the cla imants  have not proved th at any of the docum ents in this subcategory are 
private and conf idential to the Brakes.  (The y make a sim ilar submission in rela tion to 
other parts of the account.) Indeed, t he most detai led and compr ehensiv e evidence 
before me sett ing out  the cat egories of  the documents conc erned wa s that of M r 
Spendlove, which was con cerned to show that these do cuments were  not private and 
confid ential to the Brakes.  One of these categories was 1 ,191 “social media ” emails. 
These do not h ave the necessary quality o f confiden ce, being trivia. I ndeed, Mrs  
Brake ac cepted in cross -examination  that they “really should n ot be part o f the 
discussio n. It’s de minimis …” 
176. The claimant s made a written submi ssion in repl y to this . They say t hat, althou gh they 
attempted to  identif y which em ails were actuall y disputed, it was on ly on 22 October 
2020 that  the defendants replied that  no emails w ere private or  confiden tial. It would 
have been impossible to include  all the disp uted email s in the tr ial bundles . They 
further say t hat it w as agreed betw een the parti es that the emails would be dealt with 
as categ ories.  They say  that if ther e remains a dispute or any  doubt over particular  
emails , then a further hearing w ould be neces sary. Finally, they s ay it is no t necessary 
for an em ail to be put to a  witness to resol ve whether it is priv ate and confidentia l. 
177. The defendants lodged a written  note in res ponse to the cl aimant s’ reply.  They agreed 
(as they had already said in closing) t hat it was not necess ary for eve ry single 
document to  be put  to witness es. But they said  that  
“there had to be some attempt by the Brakes to take th e court syste matically 
through the diffe rent subc ategories of disputed documents (including 
examples from e ach subcate gory). Non e of that w as done.”

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
45 
 They also submitt ed that the re should be no f urther hear ing to dea l with particular 
emails,  because this was the trial of all the n on-iniquity iss ues. 
178. I accept th at this is the trial of the non -iniqui ty issues in this claim. U nless it  is agreed 
between the parties t hat the re should b e a further hearin g (and it is clear t hat it is not) I 
can see no good reason why the resol ution of unc ertainty on tho se issues  should be 
further delayed. On the first part  of the resi dual category,  on th e evidence be fore me I 
conclude that, with the excep tion of the two em ails put t o Mr Spend love in cross -
examination , the clai mants have not sat isfied me th at they w ere private or confidential 
to the claim ants, rather than business e mails. 
179. The second part of the resi dual category : As to the second  part of the resi dual 
category (48 49 em ails), the cla imants say that th ese too ar e private and confide ntial to  
them, but also say that at least some of the emails in this category  were ‘plainly’ 
private on the ir face.  As I have said, in addition to their o verarching submis sion as t o 
the lac k of a reasonable expec tation of con fidentiali ty or priv acy in the account , the 
defendants say that these documents e vidence wrongdoing  which dep rives the  
claima nts of any rights of confidentia lity and privacy that they m ight otherwise ha ve 
(the s o-called “iniquity defence ”). Once more, howe ver, the c laimants b ear the bur den 
of proving their case. In order for the court to be satisfied tha t a docum ent was 
“plainly ” private on its face, then in t he absence of agreement the court would have t o 
see it . Yet only three of these d ocuments were put to Dr Guy in cross -examinatio n, 
and j ust eight more we re put to Mr Spendlov e.  
180. As to these 11 docume nts, the three put to Dr Guy were as f ollows.  One was an email 
exchange with Mrs Brake’s brother  in Nov ember 20 15 (durin g the currency of the 
Brakes ’ bank ruptcy) , which concern ed a watc h that had  been stored in a safe, and 
which she sent to him.  Dr Guy sai d that he  did not read th is email, but  he unde rstood 
that his lawyers had passed it t o the trustee in b ankruptc y, Mr  Swift, because it 
concerned a valuable asset.  The second  was a letter dated 26  September 2007 from 
Stuart Ritchie to Mr Brake regarding his  father ’s estate. Dr Guy said he had n ot read 
this. It wa s the lawyers who decided to  give it to Mr Swi ft, and he assume d that this 
was be cause it referred to a disposition of funds. The third do cume nt was a letter of 
wishes written by Mrs Brake to Simon W indus. It  was given  by th e lawyers to Mr 
Swift  because it  referred to the disposition  of £2.7 million. I accept that the se three 
documents  are private “on their face ”, but cont ain informa tion whi ch m ay bear on the  
“unlawful scheme ”, and have been retained on that b asis. 
181. Other d ocuments put to Dr Guy i ncluded a written advice (it is not sta ted by  whom , 
thoug h I understand fr om M s Brown that i t was a member of the Bar) dated 17 Ju ly 
2014 “summarisin g the law relating to the creation of a Trust seeking to prot ect the 
interest of me mbers of the  Brake Famil y in t he ev ent of bankruptcy ”. There wa s also a 
set of instructions to cou nsel (it is not st ated which counsel ) prepared by Peter 
Williams of  Michelmores  in September 2014 to advise in relation to the setting up of 
a discretionary trust for th e ben efit of Mrs Brake’s son Tom . Dr Guy  understood that 
these documents had been passed  to Mr Swif t in response to a re quest under section 
366 of the  Insolvency Act 1986. But he had not personal ly made the decision ; he had 
left it to his lawyers t o deal w ith. Again, t hese are pr ivate “on their face ”, but h ave 
been retained because they are assumed to conce rn matters of int erest to the Brakes ’ 
trustee in ba nkruptcy.

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
46 
 182. As to the eight d ocuments put t o Mr Spendlove , the first was an emai l from Mrs 
Brake’s accou ntant Stuart Ritchie  to her in March 2017 , indicatin g that in future he 
would be charging h er normal fe es, because she n ow had assets.  The defe ndants 
soug ht to retain  this as eviden ce of the rece ipt of proceeds from the so-called  
“unlawful scheme ”. The sec ond was an em ail from Mr s Brake to the official rece iver 
checking the date on which she was discharged from bankruptcy. This was retained as 
a document (albeit mundan e) relevant to t he Brakes ’ bankruptc ies, because of 
concerns about  their conduct i n those bankruptcies. The third and fourth document s 
were emails from Mrs Brake to Mr Swift ’s solic itor relatin g to a forthcomin g hearing . 
These too w ere retained  as document s relevant to th e Brakes ’ conduct in the 
bankruptcies.  The fifth d ocument is an em ail in April 2017 from Peter Wil liams to 
Mrs Brake wishing h er well  after illness . The defendants s eek to retai n it because 
there are questions over Mr  Williams ’ involvement in the “unlawful scheme ”. The  
sixth document is an email in M arch 2018 from Mrs Brake to h er ac countant s 
concernin g the accounts for Loxley & Brake Ltd . The defendant s seek to retai n this 
on th e basis that ther e are issues about Mrs Brake selli ng furniture  from her company 
to the thir d defendant.  The seventh document is an email in Janu ary 2018  appa rently 
from A lice W yatt (but , as put in cross -examination  by Ms Brown, really from Mrs  
Brake)  seeking to appeal aga inst a parking ticket i ssued in Be aminster.  The 
defendant s seek to retain t his on the basis that it suggests tha t she was using her 
niece’s name when  she w as ba nkrupt to enter into a hire purchase transaction . The last 
document  was an exch ange of email s between Mrs Brake and the  finance de partment 
at her son ’s school  about arrear s of school fees.  The defendant seek to retain that o n 
the ba sis that it c oncern ed si gnificant expenditure at a t ime when Mrs Brake had the 
proceeds of what is alle ged to be the “unlawful scheme ”. None of  these is a n AE L 
busine ss email, and I assume from D r Guy ’s answers in cross -examination  that he 
would ac cept them as ‘private ’, subject to the overarching submissio n that there was 
no reasonable expectat ion of priva cy in the account . The defendants also c laim to 
retain them as part of the “iniquity defence ” argument.  
183. During the cross -examinat ion of Mr Spendl ove, it becam e appare nt that the re was an 
issue between the two sides a s to the meaning and effect  of provision s in the order of  
Mr Jarvis QC of 28 Nov ember 2019.  (This had a lso been raised during the cr oss-
examination of Dr Guy.) Paragraph s 14 to 17 of th at order  provided a m echanism fo r 
the review of the document s in dispute and for the destruction of  documents w hich 
were either not in dispute  or the c ourt decide d should be destroyed. Paragraph 18 of 
that order however provided that:  
“For the avoidance of  doubt, the Guy Parti es are enti tled to refuse to destroy a 
document if it falls within the scope o f categories  of documents set  out at 
paragraphs 5 an d 6 above. ” 
184. Paragraphs 5 and 6 creat ed exceptions to  the injunction granted in paragraph 3 of the 
order . Paragrap h 5 i s accept ed not to b e relevant  to the present qu estion. It is 
paragraph 6 that matters.  This states  that the injunct ion “does not prevent t he court or  
tribunal seised in any of the following proceedings from making an order for 
disclosure or in spection  of documents  in the Account”, and  then reference is  made to 
5 sets of proceedings, includi ng this one.  The defendants h ave interpreted  paragra ph 
18, taken together w ith paragraph 6 , as meaning t hat, if a document is disclosab le in 
any of the liste d procee dings , then t hey are not  obliged to destroy it.

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
47 
 185. On this question, the critical words are “the scope o f categories  of documents set  out 
at [paragraph 6]  above. ” Do they mean  (i) documents ordered  to be disclosed in the 
listed proceedings?  (ii) docum ents which will be d isclosable  in the listed proceedings? 
Or even  (iii) documents which may be disclosable  in the listed proceedings?  The 
claimants argued for  (i), the defen dants for  (ii). I did not understand anyone to argue 
for (iii). In the context in w hich the orde r was m ade, at a t ime when no disclosure 
order s had been made in any proceedings , and it was not likely that any would be 
made before the review contemplated by  the order was carried out, it makes little 
sense for the words to bear meaning  (i). Also, it is  not cl ear to me why the court 
would wish to d istinguish between documents which had already been ordered to be 
disclosed and those which would be so ordered in  due course. In my judgment, 
meaning  (ii) is to be preferred to meaning  (i). 
186. As to th e remaining 4 ,838 documents in this category, the d efendan ts say that the 
court has no evide nce, and the refore is in no p osition to decide, that  they are ‘ plainly’ 
priva te on their face, or in deed  simply pri vate. The court has not be en taken to them.  
To judge f rom the evide nce of Mr S pendlove, some of them contai n no private or 
confide ntial infor mation at all,  such as emails to  and from estate age nts making 
property enqui ries. This information is publicly available. This i s not a tech nical 
point. Th e court is be ing asked to grant an in junction, failure to comply w ith which 
may result in com mittal to prison . It is a serious matte r. The case for  the injunction 
has therefore to be shown.  However, there is a further question. W hatever the result of 
the first enquiry,  the defendan ts claim  to retain these documents as ev idence o f the 
alleged “unlawful sc heme ”. I canno t determine whethe r they do evidence s uch a 
schem e, because the  iniquity  defence has not yet been tried. For pres ent purposes, 
therefore, I am not  satisfied that , if th ere was a r easonable  expectation of 
confidentiality or privacy , they canno t be subject t o the iniquity def ence. So a final 
injunction c ould not be gran ted in relation to them at this st age. 
The claimants ’ third categor y: 11,197 emails  
187. Retu rning now to the  “third cate gory” of 11,1 97 emails,  it wi ll be recalled th at Mrs 
Brake in her evi dence makes a claim to privacy or confidentiality only in relation to 
9,500 documents. It is not clear what  has happ ened to the 1,697 docume nts which are 
not include d in  the 11 ,197. I must assume that no claim is m ade to them. 
Unfortunately, that m eans that I do not know  which are the 9 ,500 that Mrs Brake  does 
claim as private an d confidential to he r. Moreover, i n her writt en evidence, Mrs Br ake 
accepts that some of the se 9,500 (whic h I shall call the f irst subcateg ory) are not 
confident ial from the defend ants, because the defendants or their  agents sent them to 
Mrs Brake during th e course of her empl oyment , and the y relate t o her position as an 
employee of the third d efendan t. For ex ample, they deal wit h her s alary or her tax 
affairs. Su ch things are not c onfidential as  against her employer, but they are or may 
be as against third parties. Mrs Brake s ays that she sh ould not b e required to destroy 
such emails.  
188. In principle  I accept tha t Mrs Brake should n ot have to destr oy such emails. She was 
intend ed to re ceive, and is entitled to retain,  information  from her empl oyer dealing 
with her employment . At the same time, I do not un derstand Mrs Brake to object to 
the defendants ’ being able t o process and use th e same information for the purpo ses of 
their business.  I accept that , if they have passed any of  these documents  to third 
parties, a question may then arise as to br each of con fidence. But this question is fact -

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
48 
 sensitive. It would need to be considered doc ument by document. I would need to  see 
this document (or group  of do cuments) as having been  passed to that person , in these  
circums tances. However, non e of these documents was put to any  witness , or drawn 
to the attention o f the court.  
189. Mrs Brake sa ys that others  of the emails  in the third cate gory (the  second 
subcategory)  are communications “with Mrs Foster and/or he r advisers, and/or relate 
to the sale ” of Sarafina to Ched ington . But commu nications a bout the affairs of 
Saraf ina or its sa le between its director/sh areholder and  its employees cannot be 
private or  confidential  as ag ainst Sarafina/ AEL  itself. Their mere rete ntion by the 
defenda nts cannot be unlawfu l. In any event , I have he ard no evide nce as to wh ich 
emails fal l within the sec ond subcategory . Mrs Brake refer s only (and in general 
rather than specific terms) to the witness s tatement of her so licitor Mr Christi an Smith 
dated 9 Jul y 2020. But  this was a witness statement  made in support of the Brakes ’ 
application for summary judgmen t, and not as evidenc e for the trial. Moreover, Mr 
Smith  was not tendered for  cross-examination. To the ex tent that  Mrs Brake sought  to 
incorporate passa ges by refe rence into her  own evidence, as a ki nd of list of 
documents, I think it wo uld be of some ass istance. But I cannot  locate in that witness 
statement a ny re ference to “personal  emails with Mrs Foster a nd/or her  advisers 
and/or  relating to the sale of her shar e to Dr Guy/Ch edington ”. So in fact it does not 
help me.  None  of these ema ils was put to a witn ess, or shown to t he court.  
Factual conclusions on ca tegories  
190. The factual conclusions which I rea ch on this part of the case a re ther efore these. The 
parties have a greed that (i) 33,528 of the 62,52 4 emails in the enquiries  account are 
business emails and the claimants make  no claim to them, and (ii) 5,511 emails 
(subject to reasonable expectation of privacy) are priva te to the claimants , and the 
defendants have agre ed to delete them . As to the re mainder, (iii) the 11,197 emai ls 
(9,500 according to Mrs Br ake) in the third catego ry have not been shown to be 
private or confid ential  as again st the d efendants . Finally , (iv) as to the 7 ,798 emails  in 
the residual category, the first subcategory of 3,149 are not private t o Mr s Brake, 
whereas the second of 4,849 (but subject to the questi on of reasonable expect ation  of 
confidentiality  or pr ivacy ) are prima facie privat e to her, but are also subject to the 
possible application of th e iniquity defence.  For the sa ke of clarity, I  repeat that the 
other  accounts, wi th ad dresses  “alo@ ” and “andy@ ”, were never disclosed to nor 
accessed by the  defendants . 
Expectations of confidentiality/privacy  
191. There  is one important  factual issue r emaining for deter mination . That is th e question 
of the partie s’ expectati ons of confident iality and privacy in th e enq uiries accoun t, 
and if so whether they were  reasonable expectation s. However, I cannot resolve that 
questio n withou t first considering certain matters of  law. One of these m atters relates 
to the own ership of the  axnoller domain,  website and related emai l account s. This 
cannot of course be the end po int of th e expectation debate . I accept  that 
“Con fidenti ality i s not d ependent upon locks a nd keys or thei r electroni c equ ivalent s”: 
Imerman  v Tchenguiz  [2011] Fam 116, [79] , [88]. The relevance of the legal posi tion 
is that it is part of the context  in wh ich the question arise s whether  there were 
reasonable expectatio ns of privacy  or confidential ity in the account .

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
49 
 192. I will also need in due course to deal with the evaluation of the factual  elements 
involved in the  reasonable expectations of privacy and confidentiality . But I will 
postpone discussion of these until I  have dealt  with the relevant law, so that they can 
be seen in their context.  
THE ISSUES  
Pleaded cases  
193. I turn now to the issues  that arise in this case . It is desirable to  begin by reminding 
myself of the  pleaded cases of the partie s. Although I have read and take ac count of 
the whole of the particulars of claim and the def ence (th ere is no reply) I emphasise 
here ce rtain key poin ts.  
194. Paragraph 13 of the Particulars of Claim says:  
“13. In October 2009, unrelated to the  Partnershi p, the Brakes registered the 
domain nam e “axno ller.co.uk ” (“Axnoller Domain ”), which remained dormant 
until the formal disso lution of the  Partnership in  2013.” 
195. The claiman ts go on to refer in the Amended Particul ars of Clai m to “any email 
accounts wi thin the Axnoller Domain ” as “the Axnoller Ac counts”, and go on  to say: 
“16. The Conf idential Documents/Information within the Axnoll er Accounts 
include : 
(i) Private correspondence to fr iends and family . 
(ii) Private corr espondenc e with legal advisers . 
(iii) Private correspondence w ith accountants.  
(iv) Private corres ponde nce with medical professionals.  
Many of the emails  contain inform ation of an i ntense ly perso nal nature 
including medic al test results, a lett er of wishes , feedbac k from Mrs Brake’s 
son’s school teachers  and emails w ithin the family a nd friends.  
17.  The Confidential Docume nts/Information  contain the Claimants’ personal 
data within t he mea ning of Article 4 of the General D ata Protection Re gulati on 
and sensi tive pers onal data within the meani ng of Article 9 of the Gene ral 
Data Protectio n Regulation . 
[ … ] 
21. Following the acquisition of the  Farm by SPL/AE L in 2015 , Mrs Brake 
continued to employ ACS personally under the  Conf identiality Agreement, 
retaining and using the  Axnoller Accounts  as her own . 
22. In particular,  Mrs Brake:

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
50 
 a. did not sell or transfer the  Axnoller Domain  or the  Axnoller Accounts to 
SPL/AE L; and  
b. used enquiries @ as her personal email account, with the r esult that all of he r 
private information and contact details were stored there.  
[ … ] 
28. All information containe d within the  Axnoller Acc ounts was priva te and 
confid ential  to the  Brakes with the exception of any  booking or  AEL-related 
email s sent or  received by Mrs Brake at enquiries @ in her capacity as agent 
for AE L (“Booking Emails ”). The Brakes had a reas onable e xpectation that all  
Confi dential Documen ts/Informatio n within the  Axnoller Accou nts (i.e. not 
inclu ding the  Booking Emails) woul d remain private and confidential.  SPL 
under the control of Mrs Foster and AE L under the control o f Dr Guy left the 
mana gement o f the  Booking Emails  to Mrs Brake and ne ver once requ ested 
access t o the same .” 
[ … ] 
41. The access t o and copying of the Confidential Docum ents/Information by 
the Guy Parties  is improper and unlawful:  
(i) The Guy Pa rties did not (and do not) have permiss ion from the  Brakes to 
access the  Axnoller Accounts or to process the  Confidential 
Documents /Informati on. 
(ii) It was in breach of  ss 1 and 2  of the  Computer Misuse Act 1990.  
(iii) It was in breach of  s 170  of the  Data Protection Act 2018.  
(iv) It constitu ted a personal data breach within the meaning of the general 
regulation on data protection.  
(v) It was  in breach of the Brakes ’ rights under Article 8 of the European 
Convention on Hum an Rights , including their rights to private life and 
correspondence  
(vi) The accessing, deployment and distribution of the  Confidential 
Documents /Information  constitutes a c ourse of condu ct which the  Guy Parties 
knew or ought to have known amounted to harassment of the  Brakes within 
the meaning of the Protection  from Harassme nt Act 1997.  
(vii) The availability to the  Guy Parties ’ legal team of unfettered access to the  
Confiden tial/Informat ion denies the  Brakes of t heir rights under Article 6  of 
the European Convention on Human Rights to a fair trial.  
42. Further, the  Guy Partie s have procured a Breach of the  Confidentiality 
Agreement  by ACS. In particular, in ac cordance with th e terms of th e 
Confidentiality Agreemen t, ACS was bound not to disclose  Confidential 
Documents /Information  to the  Guy Parties and all such data should hav e been 
returned to the  Brakes. ”

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
51 
 (The underlined wor ds were a dded in the amended  particula rs of claim.)  
196. In their def ence the d efendant s say: 
“55. Paragraph 13 is denied. The doma in name  axnoller .co.uk was originally 
used in connection with the  Partnership b usiness and the  Brakes are put to 
proof that it was not acquired using  Partnership funds. The domain n ame was 
subse quently not renewed by the  Partnership and was instead renewed by and 
registered to SPL/A EL. 
[ … ] 
59. As to paragraph 16, no admissions  are made in respect o f the  Personal 
Accounts. As regards  the Enquiri es Account:  
(1) It is denied  that ther e are any con fidential or privile ged do cuments in t he 
Enquir ies Account.  
(2) It is adm itted that there a re a numb er of emails on the  Enquiries Accoun t 
of a personal nature . Paragrap hs 7, 8, 13 and 14 above are repeated.  
(3) It is de nied ( if it is  alleged) that Mrs Brake’s correspondence w ith le gal 
advisers  or accou ntants engaged by SPL/AE L could be confident ial or pr ivate 
or privileged  as against the Guy Pa rties. 
(4) Paragr aph 16(i) is embarrassing for want of particular ity and the  Guy 
Parties cannot plead to it. The  Guy Parties may seek t o amen d this Defen ce on 
provision of further and bett er particulars fro m the  Brakes. 
60. It is aver red that cat egori es of  documents identi fied paragraph 16 comprise 
only a s mall proporti on of the ema ils in  the Enquiries Acc ount. Further , in the 
Review, the  Brakes have label led a lar ge number of other emails as private 
which d o not fal l into any of the c ategories pleaded  at paragraph 16 inclu ding 
(but not limited to):  
(1) Emails between Mr s Brake  and D r Guy;  
(2) Emails betwee n Mrs Brake  and Mrs Guy; 
(3) Emails bet ween Mrs Brake and other former SPL/AE L employe es, namely 
Ms Holt  and Mr W indus; 
(4) Emails b etween Mrs Brake  and AEM accountants an d financial advisers 
Milstead Langd on, Old Mill and AF B Accou ntants ; 
(5) Emails betwe en Mrs Brake  and the Guy Parties ’ solic itors, Verisona Law 
and Moore Blatch ; 
(6) Emails between Mrs Brak e and SPL/AEL’s former IT pr ovider, ACS; and  
(7) Emails sent and re ceived by  Mrs Brake  in the course o f working for  SPL 
during t he per iod proh ibited by  the Second Bl ackburne Order.

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
52 
 None of t hese emails is, or co uld be, private, confident ial or privileged against 
the Guy Parties . 
61. It is admitted t hat t he Enquiries Acco unt c ontains some data within the 
meaning of Articles 4 and 9 of th e Genera l Data Pro tection Regul ation 
(GDPR). Paragr aph 17  is otherwis e denied.  
[ … ] 
64. Save that it is admitted that SPL acquired the  Estate in 2015, paragraph 21 
is deni ed. … 
65. Alternatively,  Mrs Brake  and any assets belongin g to Mrs Brake vested in 
her trustees in ban kruptcy at th at date such that, on SPL ’s acquisition of the  
Estate, she could not have continued to have treated the  Enquiries Account 
and the  Personal Ac coun ts even if (which is denied) they had been set up prior 
to SPL’s acquisition of the  Estate . 
66. Paragraph 22 (a) is: 
(1) Admitted insofar as it relates to the  axnoller .co.uk domain name.  The 
domain name was not  Mrs Brake ’s asset to sell or transfer.  … 
(2) Admitted insofar as it relates to the  Enquiries Account and the  Personal 
Accounts.  The Enquiries Ac count and the  Personal Accounts did not  belong to  
Mrs Br ake such that  she could sell or transfer them to A EL. … 
67. Paragraph 22 (b) is denied,  save that:  
(1) It is admitted that Mrs Brake used the  Enquiries Account to send and 
receive a small number of per sonal emails.  Mrs Brake and a numb er of  other 
email accounts and she is put to proof of all email accounts operated for 
personal purposes (and the extent they use) at all material times. It is denied 
that all of  Mrs Brake ’s private information and contact details were stored on  
the Enquiries Ac count.  
(2) It is averred that  Mrs Brake only had access to the  Enquiries Account by 
reason of her work for A EL. … 
[ … ] 
74. Paragraph 28 is  not admitted inso far as it  concerns the Personal Account s. 
Save that it is admitted that Mrs Brake received emails as an agent of 
SPL/AE L and that she had access to the Enquiries Account  only for the 
purpose of, and by r eason of,  working in  SPL/AE L’s, paragraph 28 is denie d 
as rega rds the Enquiries A ccount. In partic ular: 
(1) it is denied  that any email in the  Enquiries  Account could b e confidentia l 
because t here was no reasonable expectati on of confiden tiality for reason s 
aforesa id.

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
53 
 (2) It is denied that there was any reas onable ex pectation of privac y in respect 
of the en quiries ac count a s a wh ole for reasons aforesaid.  
(3) It is averr ed that many of the  docu ments labelled by the  Brakes as private 
in the  Revie w fall withi n the def inition of ‘booking emails ’ and therefore ar e 
not pri vate and confidenti al even on the  Brakes’ own plead ed case . Para graphs 
4 to 5 and 60 above  are repeated.  
(4) It is deni ed tha t SPL wa s ever under the control of Mr s Foster for reason s 
aforesaid.  
75. Furt her, and in any event:  
(1) It is denied that any emai ls evidencing wrong doing on the part  of the 
Brakes  are con fident ial or private against the  Guy Parties.  The Guy Parties  are 
entitled to use such documents in their  litigation w ith th e Brakes.  
(2) It is d enied that confidentiality  and privacy can be  asserte d over any emails 
which evidence mat ters that may b e the s ubject  of legitimate inte rest to  the 
Brakes ’ trustees in bank ruptcy  or the partnership ’s liquidators  and w hich the  
Guy Parti es wish to disclose t o the same.   
(3) It is den ied that any emails evidenc ing or sent in furt herance of the  
Unlawfu l Scheme a re conf identi al or priva te.” 
197. So the mai n claim by the c laimants is t hat all inform ation contained  within the  
enqui ries accoun t was private and confident ial to the  Brakes except  for AEL-related 
emails sent or received by Mrs Brake on behalf o f AEL. The main  defenc e is to deny 
the claim on the ba sis that there w as no reasona ble expectatio n of confidentiality or 
privacy in the acco unt. In addition issues arise  about the setting up of the Axnoller  
domain and  the email accounts, and who “owns ” them.  
198. The claim fo rm does howe ver mention other claims, n amely procuring a breach of 
contract, and the claim for compensation under article 82 of the (EU)  General Data 
Protection Regulati on. The parti culars of claim also include a claim under the  
Protection from Harassment Act 1997. In  addition,  they allege that  criminal liability 
under the Computer Misuse Act and the Data Protection Act was engaged, and rely on 
this as supp ort for claims f or breach of privacy. I de al with these points later, to the 
extent necessary.  
List of  issues  
199. The parties agreed a list of is sues that were said to arise in this claim. I set it out here 
before going on to consider matters of law.  
“The cont ext to the Enquiries Account  
1. When w as the domain n ame ‘axn oller.co.uk’ set up and for whom?  
2. When was  the Enquirie s Account set up and when were the first emails sent 
to/from that Accou nt?

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
54 
 3. To whom do the domain name and/or the Enquiries Account belong (a nd to whom 
have they belonged since their creation)?  
4. Was the Enquiries  Account primarily used as SPL/ AEL’s main bu siness email 
address? Was it held out to the world as such?  
5. Did SPL/AEL pay all costs and expenses associated with the domain name and 
the E nquiries  Account between the time they were set up and 8 November 2018?  
6. Who had a ccess to the En quiri es Account, f or what purposes and to wh at extent 
did they use the Enquiries Account for personal rather than b usiness purposes?  
7. What was the purpose of t he passwords to the Enq uiries Account, the Personal 
Accounts and the Fasthosts Account,  who held those  passwords, a nd was 
SPL/AEL entitled to  instruct (i) ACS to change the passwords to the Enquiries 
Account an d/or (ii) emplo yees ( including Mrs Brake) to p rovide it (SPL/AEL) 
with the passwords?  
8. Did the Guy Parties invite th e Brakes’ trust ee in bankruptcy o r the liquida tors of 
the Partnership to  sell to AEL the web site www.axnol ler.co.uk, the associated 
domains and the email accounts including the Enquiries Account?  
Confidentiality and privacy  
9. Was there a reasonable expe ctatio n of confidentiality in resp ect of the En quiries 
Account as a whole , save for Booking  Emails (as defined in the APoC )?  
10. Was there a reasonable expectation of privacy in respect of th e Enquiries Account 
as a whole, sa ve for Booking Emails  (as defined in the APoC)?  
11. In answering issues  9 and 10 abo ve, what effect do the fol lowing contracts have:  
i) The terms of the Brakes’ employment by SPL/AEL and/or 
Chedington.  
ii) The warranties in  the S PA. In particular, did Mrs Foster 
warrant that the Enquiries Account belonged to SPL/AEL in the 
SPA?  
iii) The ACS Confid entiality Agreement. In par ticular, is the 
Enquiries Account within the scope of the ACS Confidentiality 
Agreement? If so, was it b reache d? 
12. Are any of the documents in the Enquiries Account private and confidential to the 
Brakes ?  
Guy Parties’ use of materi al from the Enquiries Acco unt  
13. What were the Guy Parties’ r easons for see king access to, copying and denying 
the Brakes access to the Enquir ies Account?

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
55 
 14. What use have the Guy Parties made of information in the Enquiries Account and 
with whom  have they sh ared that information?  
15. Was any of the information found to have been used at issue 14 above, 
confidential or private to the Brakes?  
16. What of fers did the Guy Parties make to the Brakes (and on what terms) for them 
to remo ve any person al emails in the Enqui ries Account? Were those o ffers 
reasonable and was the withdrawal of those offers reasonable?  
17. Did t he Guy Parties retain any emails or copies  of emails from the Personal 
Accounts?  
Miscellaneous  
18. For th e purpose of a claim in conf identiality o r privacy are  any o f the following 
provisions relevant in law and/or actionable:  
iv) Sections 1 and 2 of the Computer Misuse  Act 1990;  
v) The General Data Prote ction Regulation 2016;   
vi) The Pr otection from Harassment Act 1997; and  
vii) Articl es 8 and 6  of the European  Convention o n Huma n Rights?   
19. If so, h ave the Guy Parti es breached those provisions?  
Preliminary Issue on Iniquit y/Public Inte rest Defence  
20. On the facts and matters pleaded by the Guy Parties at paragraphs 16 -17, 19 -47 
and 75 of the  Defence, is an in iquity or public i nteres t defence available to them in 
law?  
Remedies  
21. Are the Brakes entitled to d amage s and, if so, in what amount?  
22. Are the Brakes entitled to a final injunction and, if so, in respect o f what 
document s? 
23. Are the  Brakes entitled to an order fo r destruction  and, i f so, in respect of  what 
documents? ” 
Ownership of the domain and email accounts  
200. The first few of the issues in the list set out above deal with the ques tion of ownership 
of the domain and the email accounts . In order to be able to take account of my  
conclu sions in the follow ing sections of this judgment , I will deal with them here. 
Ownership of the axno ller domain

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
56 
 201. First of a ll, I deal with t he axno ller domain . This was regis tered with Nomin et in 2009 
on the instructio ns of Mrs Brake. It was at a time  when  Mr and Mrs Brake wer e in 
partnership  togethe r, befo re the partnership with PWF. The actual registran t was 
Simon  Deverell, but, as between hi m and Mrs Brake, the latter must have be en 
benefi cially entitled to all such rights  in the dom ain as there wer e. These would have  
includ ed rights to pre vent oth ers fro m using the same domain without consent. Such 
rights constit ute a chose  in ac tion or bund le of choses in actio n. It is not  clear whether 
Mrs Brake personally paid the  costs , or whethe r they were paid  by Mr and Mrs 
Brake ’s original partnershi p of 200 8. But here there is no issue as between Mr and 
Mrs Brak e, and so I  need not c onside r that.  I will sim ply ass ume that it i s Mrs Brake.  
202. When  in February 2010 the partnersh ip with PWF was e ntered  into, it use d the S tay in 
Style domain , and email accounts w ith add resses in that domain, rather than the  
axnoll er domain. Howeve r, I have held  that the new part nership ultimately paid the 
bills for th e axnoller domain , includ ing renewal fees . At that time Mrs Brake w as th e 
managing partner, a nd PWF ( and Mr s Brehme) had no right to make d ecision s about 
how the business was c onducted  day to  day. In my judgm ent, Mrs Brake ’s decision 
that t he partners hip shoul d pay the whol e of t he invoices relating to the domain, rather 
than a proportionate share  of them , is o nly consistent, in the case of a n hones t 
managing partner, with a dec ision th at the axnoller domain s hould be renewed for the 
benefit  of the  partners hip, in return  for the partnership indemn ifyin g her  against the 
present an d future expens es. However, t he liquidators of the partnershi p howev er 
have not been parties to th is claim , and n one of this has b een argued bef ore me. So 
any dec ision could  not bind  them.  The par tnersh ip was dissolved in 2 013, and p ut into 
liquidat ion in 2017. I note th at there is no  evidence of any attempt by the partner ship 
or the liquidators to dea l with the doma in thereafter.  
203. In May 2015, th e Brakes were adju dicated ban krupt.  Their beneficial  prope rty vested 
at first i n the  Official Receiver, a nd then  in the trustee s in bankruptc y. If therefore 
Mrs Brake still possess ed any residual rights in the domain, then those  vested in the 
trustees, for  the benefit of M rs Brake’s creditors , under s ection  283(1) o f the 
Insol vency  Act 1986 . The claimant s did not se ek to argue that  section 2 83(2)(a) of the 
Act applied, and I p roceed on the basis that Mrs Brake was entirely di veste d of any 
remaining rights in  the domain, for t he benefit of her cr editors.  
204. The s ale of  West Axno ller Farm to Sara fina b y the LPA rec eivers in July 2 015 cannot 
in itself have made any diff erence to the beneficial owner ship of the dom ain. This is 
because the  sale was only of the proper ty charged by Mrs Brake to the bank, and that 
did no t incl ude the domain. So the rece ivers had no author ity to sell it to Saraf ina, 
even if it still belonged t o Mrs Brake.  However, Sarafina  then ca rried o n the business 
previousl y carried on by Mrs Brake , which she was now p rohibited by injunc tion 
from carry ing on . For this purpose , the com pany  used the domai n to pr ovide a s pace 
for its website and addresses for its email acco unts.  The existi ng email  accoun ts were 
replaced by new Exchange accounts in August 2015 , using the ax noller domain. As I  
have also held  (see [7 6]), from  the time of its purcha se of the Farm in July 2015 , 
Sarafina u ltimate ly paid all the Fasthosts invoic es in respect of the domain , including 
renewal fees . By virtu e of the same rea soning as in  relation to the partne rship, the 
domain passed from the partnership to Sarafina . If I were wrong, a nd Mrs Brake still 
had any residual rights  in relat ion to the  domain, they wou ld nonetheless have vested

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
57 
 in Sarafina , which paid to renew the domain . (Unlike  the ca se of the partnersh ip, all 
the relevant par ties are before the  court.)  
205. In Feb ruary 2017, Che dington  bought Sarafina, to gether wit h the bu siness it carried 
on at Axno ller. As I ha ve held, Dr Gu y neg otiated for the p ropert y itself, and also for 
the bu siness on top of that. Cla use 5 of the written agr eement made clear t hat the 
busines s was included in the sale, and clause 13 warranted that Sar afina owne d all the 
assets w hich it used in the bu sines s (except those dispos ed of since the date of the l ast 
accounts) . Mrs Brake was not  formally a p arty to thi s agreement , even though th e 
defen dants allege th at she was in fact the bene ficial own er of Sa rafina. I ignore that 
allega tion for pres ent purpo ses. But nevertheless she, and no t Mrs Foster, negotiate d 
the formal agreement, and therefore knew ev ery detail  of it.  
206. I have alre ady held  that Sarafina was alr eady th e beneficial owner o f the domain by 
virtue of having paid to renew it, and subject to that it owned any resi dual rig hts that 
Mrs Brake might hav e had in the doma in. But, in ca se I am wrong about th at, I 
consider that , as a res ult of  the negotiations  betwee n them, Dr Guy reasonably 
believed that the s ale incl uded th e domain, that Mr s Brake  was well aware of that, and  
that ye t she did nothing to disabus e Dr Guy of t hat view,  so that h e went ahead with  
the p urchase  in reliance on that b elief. Now (but o nly yea rs after the ev ent), she seeks 
to assert that  she neverthele ss  remains the o wner of  the domain.  
207. It was not argued before me, but it is however e lementar y justice that, as Lord 
Cran worth says in  Ramsden v Dys on (1866) LR 1 HL 129,  140-141: 
“If a str anger b egins to build o n my  land supposing  it to be his  own, and I , 
perceiving his mi stake, a bstain from setting him right, and leave him to 
persevere i n his er ror, a Cou rt of equity will not allow me afterward s to asser t 
my title to the  land on which he h ad expe nded mone y on th e supposition that 
the land was his own. It  considers that, wh en I saw  the mi stake into which he 
had fallen, it was my duty to be  active and to sta te my adverse titl e; and that i t 
would b e dis hones t in me to remain  wilfu lly passive o n such an occasi on, in 
order afterwards to  profit by th e mistake w hich I might have p revented .”  
(See also Lord Wensl eydale at 168.)  
208. Cases dealing with insuranc e policies  show that the  principle is not  confined  to land, 
but extends even to per sonal intangi ble pro perty, and exten ds beyond building on the 
proper ty to merel y preserving it : Falcke v S cottish  Imperial Insuran ce Co (1887) 34 
Ch D 234, 242 –43; Re Foster  (No 2) [1938] 3 All ER 610,  613. These c ases were  not 
cited  before me, but t hey ar e well-known,  as also is the princip le for which they s tand. 
In my j udgment, that principle  extend s to int angible  rights such as t hose in relation to  
an internet dom ain. Here Mrs Brak e said nothing to Dr Guy, letti ng him go  ahead 
with the purchase de spite her realising  that h e thought  Sarafi na was selling him the 
domain . It cannot be  right or just in t hose cir cumstan ces that Mrs Brak e can n ow 
assert that she continues  to own the domain . To the extent th at she in fac t retain ed any 
rights in relation to  it, she would be  estopped , as agai nst the  defendants, from 
asserting them .  
209. In 2019 Mrs Brake procured the regi stratio n of herself as r egistra nt of the domain in 
place of  Simon D everell, w ho had been the re gistrant sinc e the dom ain w as or iginally

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
58 
 register ed in 2009. But sin ce Mrs Brake had  notice  of the defendants’  rights, and 
moreover di d not pay Mr Devere ll for g iving u p his paper title , she c annot claim to be 
a good fai th purch aser of th e legal title without notice, g iving her  priority over an 
existing benefi cial owner. A ccordin gly, the registr ation in her own na me cannot put  
her in a b etter position than  she was  before hand.  
210. As a resul t of al l this, m y primary  view , and  the bas is on whic h I now proceed , is that, 
from the time that Saraf ina began to carr y on t he business a t Axnol ler in 20 15, at leas t 
as between it  and Mrs Brake,  it beneficially o wned the axnoller d omain.  My 
secon dary view, if the  primar y view be wrong, would be th at, as b etween Sar afina 
and Mrs Brak e, it owned t he domain  from  the time of the sal e to Che dington in 2017. 
I say ‘as be tween Sarafina an d Mrs Brake’ because t he liquidat ors of the Stay in Style 
partnersh ip are not partie s, have  not been heard on the quest ion, and  are there fore not 
bound by my decision. But on an y vie w Mrs  Brake is not t he benef icial owner . 
Ownership of the a xnoller email a ccounts  
211. I turn secondly  to consid er the email accounts depending on the domain  for their 
addresses. As I hav e already s aid, an email acco unt is a bundle of  rights  belon ging to 
the ac count  holder , includ ing rights to an el ectronic ma ilbox a nd transmiss ion a nd 
reception servi ces. This is an other bundle of choses in action. But t here is no 
necessar y connection betw een the own ership of the acco unt and the owners hip of the 
domain. The  addr ess of the mailbox is not the account . In the present cas e there 
appe ars t o have been a Goog le ma il account  with the address 
enquiries@ axnoller.co .uk dating from b efore August 2015 , even though the conte nts 
of that account are n o longer  available to us. That accoun t was not se t up at the same 
time a s the  domain wa s registered, in 2009, but only at some  point after  April 2011, 
either duri ng or even after the partners hip with PWF  and a t the partner ship’s expense . 
In my judgment , these accounts  belong ed to the partnershi p and not Mrs Brake 
personally.  
212. However, it doe s not matt er exactly  when the Google mail accounts were se t up. In 
Augus t 2015 those  accounts (with Goog le) were  replaced by Micro soft Exchange 
email  accounts ho sted by F asthosts. Th ese wer e entire ly new accou nts, where the 
counterparty was Fasthosts rathe r than Google , and  the service s provi ded by Fasthosts 
were  more exte nsive than those  provided by Google . They we re set up for the 
purpo ses of th e bus iness at Axn oller whi ch was by th en bein g carrie d on by Sara fina, 
and Saraf ina ultimately paid the costs re lating to these ac counts. Mrs Brake obviously 
does not assert that s he was car rying on the bus iness at this time. But undo ubtedly sh e 
knew a ll about it. Yet she still did not assert any rig hts to ownership o f these accounts . 
Indeed, h er emails of 9 November 2018 to Mr Allen and Mr Mc Donagh posit ively 
disclaim any interest in the acc ounts, and inste ad assert rights of privacy in persona l 
emails , and  of owner ship only in pre -2015 emails .  
213. In the result, I hold t hat these accou nts belonge d to Saraf ina. They were assets of 
Sarafina at the time of the sa le of that co mpany t o Che dington in 2017, and passe d 
therefore to t he defendants. If I we re wrong abou t that, they b elonged to the 
partners hip and  not to Mrs Brake. Even if I wer e wrong about  that, and Mrs Brake 
somehow had  or retained rig hts in th e accounts, she  would be estopped  from asserting 
them as against the defendan ts, for the same reasons as  in relation to the domain.

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
59 
 The contents of  the ac counts (and the webs ite) 
214. I am no t here concer ned w ith the question of owne rship of the conten ts of the 
accounts. The contents ar e infor mation, which may (depending on the circumst ances) 
be protect ed by aspects of  intellectual property la w, such as copyright and trade marks , 
and also by t he law of brea ch of confidence and indeed the new law on priv acy (as 
this claim itself asserts) . In addi tion, t he medium  on which the information  is recorded 
can be  the separate sub ject of owners hip, just a s a handwrit ten letter is a physical 
piece of pape r, as well a s eries of pieces of  information. In the present case, there are 
no claims to ownership base d on ownership of the m edium.   
215. Subject to th at, it has recent ly been held tha t there is no property  in the content s of 
emails as information.  In Capita plc v Darch  [2017] EWHC 1248 (Ch), the claimant  
sought  interim  relief against former employees  to restra in the use of in formation 
contained in email s forwarded from a company email accou nt to  a no n-company 
email accoun t. It w as argue d that the i nformation w as the compan y’s p roperty. 
Richard Spearman QC , sitti ng as a depu ty judge of the High Court, examined a  
number of decis ions from the last ten years  and said:  
“I am unable to accept  Mr Q uinn’ s submission th at Capita is , at le ast argu ably, 
entitl ed to this r elief on the basis  that the emails in question  or the ir conte nts 
are the property of Capita. ” 
216. There are  however earlier  authorities which do n ot ap pear to have been  cited to or 
discussed by the judge in that case . The claima nts’ ope ning submiss ions very pr operly 
recogn ise this. For example, in Aas v B enham  [1891] 2 Ch 2 44, 258, Bowen LJ 
referred to informat ion as partnersh ip property, and in Re Keene  [1922] 2 Ch 475,  the 
Court of Ap peal treated tr ade inform ation as ‘pr operty’  for the  purposes of  the 
Bankrup tcy Act 1914.  More  recently, in  Boardman v Phi pps [1967] 2 AC  46, 107, 
Lord Hodson said:  
“I dissent fro m the view that information is of its n ature  something which is 
not properly to be described  as proper ty. We are a ware th at what is called 
‘know-how’ in the commercia l sen se is property which may be very va luable 
as an asset. I agree with the learned judge  and with the Co urt of Appeal that 
the confi dential informati on acquired in t his case w hich was capabl e of being 
and was turned t o account ca n be properl y regarded as  the property of the 
trust.”  
And Lord G uest said (at 115):  
“If Boardman was acting on beh alf of the trust , then all the informat ion h e 
obtained in pha se 2 became trus t property . The  weapon wh ich he used to 
obtain this information was the trus t holding. an d I s ee no reason why 
information  and kn owledge cann ot be trust property.”  
217. On the other ha nd, in the same case Lord Upjohn said ( at 12 7-28): 
“The true test is to deter mine in wh at circumstance s the inform ation h as been 
acquired. If  it has been  acquired in such circumstances that it would be a 
breach of confidence to disclose it to another then courts of equity  will restrain

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
60 
 the reci pient  from communicati ng it to another . In such cases  such conf idential 
informatio n is oft en and for m any years ha s been descri bed a s the property of 
the donor,  the bo oks of authority are full of such references; know ledge of 
secret processes, ‘know -how’, confi dential informati on as to the pro spects of a 
company or of  someone's i ntentio n or the  expected re sults of som e horse race 
based  on stable or other confiden tial in formatio n. But in the end the real truth 
is that i t is not propert y in any normal sense b ut eq uity will restrai n its 
transmissi on to another if in breac h of some co nfident ial rela tionship.”  
And even more  recently , in Doug las v Hello! Ltd  [2008] 1 AC  1, Lord Nichol ls 
(dissenting in the result) said:  
“275. … information, e ven if it is confidenti al, cannot properly be  regarded as 
a form of pro perty .”  
218. Overal l, the matte r is pe rhaps mo re open than  might appea r from Capita  plc v Darch . 
It also seems to be  contex t-specif ic. However, it is not necessary to decide  this 
difficult question in the present  case, and I see no ne ed to express an y opinion.  I add 
only tha t, as the cl aimants  submit in closing, whatever may be the posit ion in relation 
to communications  generally, in any event legal privilege  in communications  does not 
vest in the trustee in bankruptcy : Shlosberg v Avonwi ck Holdings L td [2017] Ch 210 , 
CA. 
219. As for the axno ller we bsite, there may be  similar protection give n by intellectual 
property righ ts as for the contents  of emai l accounts. It is less likel y that questio ns of 
privacy an d confidentia lity will arise comp ared to emai l accounts,  because websites 
are normally intende d to convey informa tion to the public. But some websites are 
subject to re stricted access, for e xample being password -protected, and  so some 
eleme nts of privacy a nd confidenti ality may arise ev en there.  Here  in the pre sent case 
there are  no issues a rising over the website, a nd I see no need to expl ore how far it 
may be said to ‘ belong’ to one person than ano ther. 
CLAI MS IN  BREACH OF CO NFIDENCE AND  BREACH  OF PRIVACY  
Distinctiveness of claims  
220. I come now  to the question of the c laims made by  the Brake s in this  action . The main 
ones are claims  in breach o f con fidence and in the tor t of breach of privacy. T he first 
point to note is  that it is necess ary to keep the se two causes of action  separate. In 
Douglas v He llo! Ltd  [2008] 1 AC 1  AC 1, [255 ], Lord Hoff mann (in the major ity) 
said: 
“118. It is fir st neces sary to avoid b eing distracted by the  concepts  of pr ivacy 
and pe rsonal inform ation . … 'OK!'s' c laim is to protect  commercially 
confidential information and not hing mor e. …  The fact that the in formation 
happens  to have been  about th e personal life o f the  Douglases  is irre levant. It 
could have been info rmatio n about anyt hing that a n ewspa per was willi ng to 
pay for. Wha t matters is that the  Douglases, by the way th ey arran ged their 
wedd ing, were i n a position  to impose an obli gation of  confidence. They  were 
in control of the  information. ”

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
61 
 221. And Lord Nicholl s (dissenting in t he result) agreed with this whe n he said:  
“255. As the law has developed breach of confidence, or misus e of  
confident ial informa tion, now co vers two distinct causes of  action, protecti ng 
two d ifferent intere sts: privacy, and secr et ('conf identi al') informa tion. It is 
import ant to keep t hese two distinct.  In some instances information may 
qualify for  protect ion both on gr ounds of pr ivacy and co nfide ntiality. In other 
instances informatio n may be  in the public domain, and not qualif y for 
protectio n as confide ntial, and ye t qua lify for prot ection on the grou nds of 
privacy. Privacy can be invaded by furt her publication of inf ormation or  
photographs  already disclosed  to the p ublic. Conversely , and ob viously, a 
trade secret may be protec ted as co nfiden tial informa tion even tho ugh n o 
question of  personal privacy is involved. This distinction was recognised b y 
the La w Co mmission i n its repor t on Breach of Co nfidence (198 1) Cmnd 
388, [1981] EWLC 1 10, page s 5-6.” 
222. In Racing Partnership v Sport s Informa tion S ervices [2020] EWCA Civ 1 300, Arnold 
LJ (di ssenting in the re sult) referred to this case and said:  
“70. Sec ondly, c ouns el for SIS  submitted that the jud ge's conclusion wa s 
inconsi stent with the la w of pri vacy, which onl y applies to informati on in 
respect o f which the claimant has a rea sonable expec tation of privacy.  I do not 
accept this submission. As Lord Hoff mann poi nted out in  Douglas v Hel lo!, 
commerc ial confidentiality is dist inct from privacy . This i s reinforced by  the 
subsequent decisi on of the  Court  of Appeal i n Vidal-Hall v Goo gle Inc  [2015 ] 
EWCA Civ 311,  [2016] QB 1003  that breach of confidence and mis use of 
private informa tion are tw o separate a nd di stinct causes  of actio n which rest 
on different  legal foundati ons and protect differ ent inter ests, and hence a claim 
for mis use o f private inf ormation is ‘made in tort’ even though a claim for 
breach of con fidence is an equitabl e one.” 
223. I should also r efer to  the judgme nt of Mr Jarvis QC , in dec iding wh ether to gran t the 
interim injunction  sought by the Brakes pendi ng trial.  He too distinguished between 
‘private ’ and ‘confidential ’: 
“d) Is the enquiries account priva te as opposed to confiden tial to the 
Brakes?  
48. In the  light of  my earlier decis ions, th e answer to  the question is obvious. 
In Imerman  at paragraph 76 Lord Neuberge r MR said:  
‘76. Co mmunications which  are concerned with an individual's private 
life, incl uding his pers onal financ es, personal  busine ss dealings , and 
(possibly) his other  busines s dealings are the stuff of personal 
confidentiality , and are sp ecifically co vered  by article 8  of the 
Convention , which confers the right to respect for privacy and 
expressly menti ons corresp ondence .’ 
49. Other  than the d ocuments which relate to t he busin ess carried on by AEL, 
the emails in the enquiries a ccount will be private. T he me ans of determ ining

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
62 
 the dividing  line has now been agreed in the mechanism set out in paragraphs 
1 to 5 of the revised draf t order  provided b y the Guy  Parties. ” 
224. As the  claim ants said in closing, someth ing that is  private  is concer ned with a 
person ’s private  life, and is  protected by article 8 and the new tort of breach o f 
privacy. On the ot her hand, something that is confide ntial, and protected  by the 
doctrine  of breach of conf idence, such as trade secrets,  may no t be private as we ll. It 
is possible (th ough perhaps less likely) th at something may be private, but not 
confidential, in the sen se that it rela tes to a pe rson’s private life , and yet i s known t o 
(say) a section of the public. And i t is also  possibl e that somethin g may be b oth 
priva te and confid entia l. When the j udge said that emails in the enquiries account 
which d id not relate to the business ca rried on by  the third d efendan t would be 
private, he meant that they would relate to som eone ’s private li fe, rather than  to the 
business . I therefore de al wi th these two heads of c laim separately.  
Other points  
225. The second point to not e is that, although t he claiman ts appea r to r ely sep arately on 
Art 8 of the European Co nvention o n Human Rights, and its domesti c equivalents i n 
Engl ish law by v irtue of the Human  Rights Act 1 998, in thi s context it adds nothing to 
the tort of breach of priv acy, which is indeed  derived (at lea st in part) from that 
article.  
226. The third point i s that ref erences were  made to criminal  liabili ty unde r the Computer 
Misus e Act  1990, s s 1 a nd 2, and the  Data Protection Act 2018, s 170. But no 
suggestion is made that these  provisions crea te civil l iability as w ell, an d therefore , in 
the context of thes e civil pr oceedings , these references  add nothing.  They also refer t o 
Art 82 of the  (EU) Genera l Data Prot ection Regulation , both i n the claim form and in 
the amen ded pa rticulars of  claim. This expr essly creates a right t o compensation.  
Howe ver, in the cla imants ’ opening  submissions , they ref er to the  earlier provisions  
and the GDPR as “bolst ering ” their expectation of privacy . In their closing  
submissions,  they say that they “serve  to underline the impo rtance of pr eservin g 
privacy and p rivate data and the seriou sness with which the law regard s abu se”. 
Ultimately , they do not  make any sep arate  claim in respect of them , and I therefore do 
not consider them separa tely.  
227. Fourthly, there are references to  the Protection from Ha rassment Act 19 97, including 
a claim in t he prayer of the amend ed particulars of claim for dam ages under that Act. 
But there is no such reference in the claim form itself , which has never been amended . 
I do not under stand this. In any ev ent, i t was accepte d in opening th at th e factual 
matrix for the tort of harassment in this case was the same as the tort of breach of 
privacy,  and th ere co uld be only one award of damages. So I do not think I need to 
consider it separa tely. 
Breach of co nfidence  
228. I begi n my considera tion of the c laim th erefore with the equitable wro ng of breach of 
confidence . The elements of this  claim were e xplained by Megarry J  in the wel l-
known and ofte n-cited case of Coco  v AN Clark (Engineers ) Ltd [1968] FSR 415, at 
419:

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
63 
 “In m y judg ment, three el ements are no rmally required if, a part from  contra ct, 
a case of br each of co nfide nce is to succeed . First, the information  itself, i n the 
words  of Lord Greene,  MR in the  Saltman  case on page  215, must ‘have the 
necessary qualit y of conf idence  about it’. Secondly, that informa tion must 
have  been imparted i n circumstances importing an obligation of confi denc e. 
Thirdl y, there must be an u nauthorised  use of that inf ormation t o the detr iment 
of the party com municating it. ”  
229. The first  element means that informati on in the pub lic dom ain, or inform ation that is 
useless or trivial , is not p rotec ted by this doctr ine (AG v The  Obse rver Ltd  [1990] 1 
AC 109, 268, p er Lord Gri ffiths, and 282, per  Lord Goff) . The secon d element will 
include cas es where the im parting is acc idental as we ll as w here it is del iberate  (AG v 
The Ob server Ltd  [1990] 1 AC  109, 281, per Lord Go ff). Moreover , because breach 
of confidence i s an equitable d octrine re sting on conscience, the questio n is not 
whether the claim ant subje ctivel y intended to impose confid entiali ty on the defe ndant, 
but wheth er a reasonable person in the s hoes of the defen dant would ha ve appreciated 
this (Vestergaard  Fran dsen v Best net Europe  [2013] 1 WLR 1556, [23] , where Lord 
Neuberger, sitting in  the Supreme Co urt, corrected an obvious s lip in Imerman ). 
Lastly, the public interest  in preservin g the confidentiali ty of confidential in format ion 
can be outweighed by  public interest consideratio ns (AG v The Observer Ltd  [1990] 1 
AC 109, 282 -83, pe r Lor d Goff). In particular , as it is sometimes  put, there is “no 
confidence in iniquity ”. In this part of the  trial, I am dealing only with the  first two 
points. The third i s to be dealt with, if necess ary, in the later trial of the ‘i niquity 
defence’.  
Necessa ry quality of c onfiden ce 
230. So the first question is whet her the i nformation sought to be  protected  has the 
necessary qua lity of c onfidence . I know that Mr Jarvi s QC held that the account was 
confident ial as against Mrs Brake, but that was his interim conclus ion for the pur poses 
of granting interim r elief. Unlike him, I have now heard the  evidence in detail, and 
after review s of the account of  being c arried out by  each side. I have therefore reached 
my own findings on this question.  I dea lt with the factual as pects of the do cuments  the 
subject of the claim above. I conclu ded as follows. Leaving  on one side the 33 ,258 
emails agreed to be busin ess emails, and the 5,511 emails accepted (subject to 
reasonable expectation  of privacy) to be pr ivate to Mrs Br ake, I held th at the 11 ,197 
emails in the third catego ry were not  private o r confidential as again st the de fendants , 
and as to the 7 ,798 ema ils in the re sidua l category, the firs t subcateg ory (3,149) were 
not private to  Mrs Brake . That leaves only  the second (4,849) as potentiall y havin g 
the nec essary  quality of  confidence . But even  that subcategory has holes in it. As I 
have said, the 311 email s conc erning prope rty enquiries contai n publicly  availabl e 
information  and can not have the necessary quality of confid ence. The caus e of a ction 
in breach of confidence is not complete until it  is clear that none of the limiting 
principles referred to in Attorney  Genera l v The Observer Ltd applies: Metropolitan 
Police Commiss ioner  v Times  Newspapers Ltd  [2014 ] EML R 1, [ 121]. 
Obligation of con fidence  
231. The second stage is wheth er these documents we re subjected to a n obligation of 
confidence in the defendants ’ hands. The que stion here is not whether the claimants 
intended t o impose s uch an ob ligati on, but  rather  wheth er a reasonable person i n the

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
64 
 shoes o f the defendant s would hav e appreciated  this. I have already held that the 2015 
enquiries account  belonged to Sarafin a, that the defendan ts we re not told , directly or 
indirec tly, that it was be ing retained by Mrs B rake, and that Dr Guy beli eved 
(correctly) that in purchasing Sarafi na he had acquired th e account as part  of the 
business and its assets.  There was no s uggest ion by the claim ants unt il well after their 
dismi ssal (a nd indeed,  just bef ore these pro ceedings were  issue d) that the y claime d 
otherwise. By 9 November 2018, Dr Guy  was aware  of the non -discl osure agreement 
between Mr Allen and Mrs Brake,  but h e took the view (cor rectly in my ju dgment) 
that, at least  in this r espect , it could not a ffect th e pur chaser  of Sarafina  and its 
business . He also kne w that Simon Windus had unrestricted  access to the ac count.  
232. So at the time that the defendants look ed at the con tents of the accou nt, from  
November 2018 on wards,  for their own busin ess purposes,  there w as nothing to p ut 
them on notice of any impa rting of information in circu mstan ces of conf idence . Mrs 
Brake chose to put her own emails into the company ’s busin ess ema il account,  instead 
of using her own private ema il accounts  (of which she ha d several) . Dr Guy acc epted 
in evidence tha t he would have e xpected  some private use to be ma de by staf f of a 
work emai l account, but that is not the same as accep ting an obligation t o keep  any 
information thereby store d confidential.  Consequentl y, even to the exte nt that any 
documents  claimed by Mrs Brake to  be confident ial to her (but not so acc epted by t he 
defendants) w ere in fact confidential to  her, they were n ot imparted to the d efendants 
in circumstances  imposing a duty of con fidence. Accor dingly, the claim in breach of 
confidenc e mus t fail.  
Misuse of i nforma tion 
233. It is not necessary for me t o address the third stage enquiry  as to whether th ere has 
been an y misuse o f information a mounting to breach  of confid ence. Nevertheless , in 
case this matter goes  further, I will say a few words  about this l ater, to gether with the 
similar question arising in relatio n to breach of p rivacy.  
Breach of privacy  
234. Turning now to the elem ents of th e act ion for brea ch of priva cy, in Mosley v News 
Grou p Newspapers Ltd  [2008] EMLR 20, Eady  J summari sed the r elevant law in this 
way: 
“7. … The law now affor ds protection to informa tion in respect of which there 
is a reasonable expect ation of pri vacy, even  in circumstances  where  there is no 
pre-existing rela tionship giving rise of itsel f to an enforceabl e duty of  
confidence.  That is because the law is concerne d to prevent t he violati on of a 
citizen’ s autonomy, dignity and self -esteem. It is not  simply a mat ter o f 
‘unaccount able’ judge s running amok. Parliamen t enacted  the 1998 statute 
which requ ires these  values t o be acknowl edged and  enforced. … 
8. The relevan t values are e xpressed i n Arts 8 and 10 of the Convention  … 
[ … ]  
10. If the first hurdle  can be ov ercom e, by demons trating a r easonable 
expectation  of privacy, it is now clear that  the cou rt is requ ired to c arry out the

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
65 
 next ste p of weighing  the relevant competing Conv ention rig hts in the light  of 
an ‘intense  focus ’ upon the indiv idual facts of the cas e. …”  
Reaso nable e xpect ation of privacy  
235. So the firs t question is whether the claimants had a  reasonable expectation of priv acy. 
In this connect ion, in Murr ay v Expr ess N ewspaper s plc [2009] C h 481, the Court of 
Appeal said:  
“38. As we see it, the question wheth er the re is a reasonable expe ctation  of 
privac y is a broa d on e, which takes accoun t of all the circumstances of  the 
case. They include the  attributes of the cl aiman t, the n ature of the a ctivity in 
which the claimant was engaged, the place at which it was h appeni ng, the 
nature and purp ose of the intrus ion, the ab sence of consent and whet her it was 
known or could be inferre d, the effect on the  claimant an d the cir cumst ances 
in which and the  purposes for which the information came into the hands of 
the publish er.” 
236. Unlike with the claim for breac h of confi dence, t he expe ctation of privacy is  seen 
from the point of view of the claimant, not the de fendant. On the other  hand , it has  to 
be reasona ble, so there is nevertheless a degree of objectivity involved. But t his 
creates a difficulty in a case wh ere, like this one, t he first and second stage s have been 
split. Whether there is a subjectively appre ciated expec tation of  privacy can be 
determined at the first stage, on the evidence presented to me. But whether, if a 
subje ctively appreciated exp ectatio n of priva cy is so fo und, it is reasonable , will 
potentially be affected by  (for e xampl e) whether the information concerned  was 
known by  the claimant to be relevant to the question of commission of wrongdoing by 
the clai mant.  
237. In other wo rds, if you  know y ou are doi ng somethin g wrong, it may not be re asonable 
for you to have an e xpectat ion that inform ation  about that wrongdoin g wil l be kep t 
private.  But the court cannot decide that without first examining whether there is any 
evidence abou t wrongdoin g for the claiman t to know a bout. Yet (in this case) the facts 
needed to try the ‘ iniquit y defence’ have  not been found a t the fir st stage: they are 
reserved  for the second, should that be needed. In my judgment , if the court decides 
that the claimants otherwise have a reasonable expectation of privacy  in relation to the 
account , it cannot  yet make a final d ecision  in relation to these documents , said to be 
relevant to wrongdoing . It can decide only provisionally, subject  to the furt her 
decis ion at stage 2 on the facts , if that proves necessary .  
238. In this case, the claimants rely on the  following f actors as demonst rating a r easonable 
expec tation of privacy:  
1. Mrs Brake set up the axnolle r domain . The ema il accounts  dependent on that 
domain therefore be long to h er.  
2. The enquiries account was password -protected  from before the in corpor ation o f 
Sarafina , and , until the passw ords were c hang ed on 9 November 2018,  only Mrs 
Brake and Andrew A llen had  access to them, and  the defend ants (from  the purchase 
of Sarafina)  had no ne.

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
66 
 3. Only Rebecca Holt and Simon Windus were given access to t he (post-Augu st 20 15) 
enquir ies acc ount, and then only w ith the consent of Mrs Bra ke; she therefore in 
practic e contro lled the account . 
4. That accou nt was use d not  only for bu siness pu rposes,  but also for Mrs Brake’s 
personal emails.  
5. From 2014 Mrs Brak e had a non-disclo sure agree ment wi th Andrew Allen which  
required him for five yea rs not to disclose any  busin ess info rmation o f Mrs Brake .  
6. Mrs B rake conti nued to use the e nquiries account  for her personal emails after 
Chedington bought Sarafina, and D r Guy knew or expe cted this to be the case.  
7. The way in which the enquiries acc ount had been set up, protec ted and operated 
gave Mrs Br ake a reaso nable expe ctation of privac y and con fidence . 
239. Factual point 1 is correct. Mrs Brake commissioned the registr ation of the axnol ler 
domain , initially for a  two year period . But the legal concl usion a bout the ownership 
of the 201 5 account s is wrong,  as I have al ready sa id. In particular  the c laimants’ 
submission ignores (i) the  entry by the Brakes into partnership with P WF in F ebrua ry 
2010, ( ii) the  Brakes’ bankruptcies in May 2015, (iii) the ca rrying on by Sarafina of 
the busines s formerl y carried o n by Mrs Brak e, and ( iv) the sale of Sarafin a and its 
business to Chedington  in February 2017. Any reasonable person w ould u ndersta nd 
and accept t hat the email accounts for a particular business would  ordin arily pass with 
that b usiness,  and not remain with  the person who origi nally  set it up. In any  event, 
the 2015 Exchange email acco unts were new, and replaced the old Go ogle m ail 
accounts . The only  thing that stayed the same was the address used to po int to  the new 
accounts. But , as I h ave alrea dy said,  the address is not the accou nt. And the enquiries 
accoun t was used as the main business account  for the business carried  on by  
Sarafi na. Mrs Brake t old no-one that s he worked with, or even Mrs Foster ’s solicitor 
on sale, that she owned it . 
240. Factual  points  2 to 6 are also correct.  But in my judgme nt the conclusio n at 7 does not 
follow  from them,  as a matter of either lo gic or  law. Passwor d protection is  not th e 
test. I have already accepte d tha t “Confident iality is not dependent upon  locks a nd 
keys o r their electronic equiv alents ”. And the converse is true. Once C hedington 
became the proprietor of Sarafina and its busine ss, th ose wh o held the keys to the  
compan y’s secret s were bound to cede  them  to the new owners  on request . The new 
(Microsoft E xchang e) enquiries accou nt was created and pa id for by Saraf ina, and 
Sarafina was entitled to the key s to that account  from the outset , at a time when M rs 
Brake was prohibi ted from taking any part in the company ’s business . The facts that 
Mrs Foster  did not ask for those keys, a nd ne ither did Dr Guy when he first bought 
Sarafina, are ir releva nt. The fact  that the PW F partnership (not Mrs Br ake) form erly 
owned or  controlled  a (Google) email  account with the same address is equally  
irrelevant. No expectatio n of pri vacy that may ha ve bee n induced b y any use of th e 
old accoun t that there  may have been (though almost none h as been prov ed) ca n 
create a rea sonabl e expec tation of pri vacy in relation to the new account. Mrs Brake 
must, as an intelligent and experie nced bus inesswoman, have  under stood this.   
241. She also knew  that the en quiries account was used by others, Rebecca Holt and S imon 
Windus , who were not her employees, but  her colleagues . She agreed  in her 2017

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
67 
 contract of employment ( by clause 16) to give up to her em ployer on ter mination 
assets belonging to the bu siness conta ining  confidenti al information . And she never 
once said to the defendants that s he own ed the email  account s, which by itself must 
weaken any claim to an expectati on of privacy. If she then chose to use this new email  
account for he r personal em ails, rather  than one  of her  personal email accounts, she 
knew that she did this in  an accou nt bel onging to so meone el se that was used  by 
others she wo rked with . That does no t deprive her of all right s in relation t o the m, but 
it do es change  the context  in which the reasona blene ss of any expectation she may 
have had must be  assessed. 
242. My asses sment of all this is as  follows. The enquiries acc ount with which I am 
concerned was s et up only in 2015 , although ther e had be en a Goog le email  account 
with the same address before that . At that stage the new account belong ed to Sarafin a, 
rather than to M rs Brake o r the c laiman ts. Whe ther Mrs Brake had a n expectation of 
privacy  (and if so whether reasonable or not) in rela tion to emails  in the Google email 
account before  Augu st 2015  is irrelevant.  That is n either the re levan t account n or the 
relevant time . In relation to the new  2015 M icrosoft E xchan ge account, the fact that 
Mrs Brake  had the passw ord and Sara fina did not c uts no ice. Sarafina was  not a 
licensee , but was the beneficial owner , in my ju dgment fro m the time  that the new 
account w as set up, but at  the latest from the  time that Chedin gton bought Saraf ina. 
The fact t hat othe rs we re given acc ess s imply reduces the force of the argument that 
Mrs B rake had an expectation of priva cy. If others h ave access  to the sa me em ail 
account  as you , how can you exp ect that its content s should remain p rivate to you  
alone? And the cla imants h ave a ccepted that  60% of the emails in t he account were 
business emails. On any  view, it was a predominantly business account.  
243. In closing  submis sions , the cl aiman ts say that the defendants “have no d efence to the 
relian ce by the  Brakes on the conf identiality agreemen t with  Allen Computer 
Service s,” and refer to the judgment  of Mr Jar vis QC , where he says:  
“34. The only confidentiality contract be tween ACS and  any o f the parties was 
that betw een Mrs Br ake and  ACS dated 23 June 20 14. The agreement i mposed 
confi dentiali ty obl igations on ACS towards Mrs Brake. None of the 
exception s from confidentiality would be relevant in the events which took 
place . Ther e was n o conf identiality agreement in pl ace betwee n AEL a nd 
ACS. ” 
244. But, in my j udgment, the non -disclosure ag reement with A ndrew  Allen adds nothing.  
No-one can reasonably believe  that, if I sell a business to y ou containing l ocked 
assets, you ca nnot approach th e adminis trator of the business to obtain acce ss to t hose 
assets, merely becau se I previousl y procured t he admin istrat or to  promise  not to give  
the keys to anyone except me.  That would be a breach of the w ell-known princ iple of 
non-derogati on fr om grant. This is no t confined to grants of in terests in land. In 
Molton Buil ders Lt d v C ity of Westmin ster (1975) 30 P & C R 182,  at 186, Lord  
Denning MR  stated the broad principle in this way: 
“… if one man agrees t o confer a part icular ben efit on an other , he m ust n ot do 
anything which substantially deprives th e other  of the enjoy ment of  that 
benefit: beca use that wou ld be to  take away with one hand what i s given with 
the other.”

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
68 
 245. In an y eve nt, the proper scope of the  agreement with  Mr Allen was confin ed to  the 
retain er by Mrs  Brake, and could not affe ct retainer s of hi s company by others,  such 
as Sarafina. And, even in  relatio n to t he re tainer by Mrs Brake,  the ‘Confidential 
Information ’ whi ch M r Allen was to keep con fidential was “ the data a nd in forma tion 
relating to  the busi ness and management of” Mrs Brake . This cann ot bind Mr Al len in 
relation to the bus iness and ma nagement  of Sarafin a/AEL. As I have already said, Mrs  
Brak e is an astute and experien ced businesswom an. She ca nnot reaso nably  have 
thoug ht that h er 2014 agreement with Mr Allen trumpe d the rights of  Sarafina to its 
2015 business  email accou nt. 
Caselaw  
246. As to the priva te use made by employees of a business email accou nt of the employer, 
the claimant s relied on  a number of c ases, i ncluding three from  the European Court of 
Human Rights , and one from the High Co urt. The earliest ECtHR  case wa s that of 
Foxley v  United Kingdom  (2001) 31  EHRR 2 5. In this case the trustee in b ankruptcy 
of a bankrupt obtaine d an order under the Inso lvency Act 1986 for his po st to be 
diverted from his home add ress to the trustee . The b ankrupt comp laine d of a  violati on 
of Art 8.  The c ourt hel d that a  violatio n had been proved in respect of (i) diversion in 
the period after the order expire d (because th en no l onger in accordance with law) , 
and (ii)  diversion duri ng the currenc y of the ord er, but in respec t only of lega lly 
privileg ed com municati ons (beca use it was “not necessary in a democratic  socie ty” 
for the trustee to access such communications) . This decisi on does not assist m e, first  
because  the facts of the case are so far rem oved fr om the facts  of the present cas e, and 
secon d because the court did  not dis cuss the concept of reasonable expectat ion of 
privacy at all . 
247. The second  ECtHR case was Copland  v Unit ed Kingdom (2007) 45  EHRR  37. In this  
case an employer  monitored  the telephone , email and internet usage at wor k of the 
personal assistant of a co llege pr incipal without any warning. The court held that there 
had been a violation of Art 8 of the ECH R. Spec ifically on the ques tion of reasonable  
expectation, th e court said;  
“42. The app licant in th e pre sent case had been given n o warn ing that  her call s 
would be liable to monitoring, therefore she had a reasonable expectation as to 
the privacy of calls made fr om her work telephon e (see Halford, § 45). The 
same ex pectation should ap ply in relation to the a pplicant’s e -mail and 
Internet u sage.” 
248. The report  does no t set out the fac ts in any detail. But it is instructive to consider the 
case of ‘Halford ’, referred t o by the court as ju stifying  the pr oposition in the te xt. The 
reference is to the decision o f the ECtHR in  Halford v United  Kingdom [1997 ] IRLR 
471. In th at case,  a senior police o fficer ’s office telep hone was intercepted without 
any warning , and informati on obtained used to discredit her  in relation  to a s ex 
discrimination cla im that  she was pu rsuing before the Industrial (no w Employment ) 
Tribunal.  
249. The cou rt said:  
“16. As Assistant  Chief C onsta ble, Ms Halford was provided with her own 
office and two teleph ones,  one of which w as for private use. These  teleph ones

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
69 
 were part of the  Mersey side police internal telephone network, a 
telecommunicati ons system outsid e the public network. No r estricti ons w ere 
placed on the use of these telephones and no guidance was g iven to her, save 
for an assurance which she sought and received from the  Chief Constable 
shortly after she ins tituted the proceedings in  the Industrial T ribunal that she 
had autho risation  to attend to the case while on duty, including by telephone … 
[ … ] 
45. There is no evid ence of any war ning havin g been given to Ms Halford, as 
a user of the in ternal telecommunic ations syste m operated at the Merseyside 
police headquarters, that ca lls made  on t hat system w ould be liable to 
interception.  She would, the Cour t considers, have ha d a reasonable 
expectatio n of pr ivacy for such calls , which expectation was moreover 
reinfo rced by a nu mber  of factor s. As Assistant C hief Constable she had sol e 
use of  her office where ther e were two telephones, one of which was 
specif ically  design ated fo r her private u se. Furthe rmore, she had been given 
the assur ance, in respons e to a memorand um, that she  could use her  office 
telephone s for the purposes of her sex-discrimin ation case (see paragraph 16 
above) .” 
250. The facts were therefore particularly strong in favour of a reasonable  expect ation of 
privacy for Ms Half ord. She was  a very senior poli ce officer , with her own private 
office, two telephone s, of which one  was expressly for her private use, and the benefit 
of an assurance that she  could  deal w ith a matter that was both private and 
confidential – her se x discr imination cl aim – from her offi ce (thereby implying that 
communications wo uld be private) . There is nothing to sh ow what  were the working 
arrangements o f the personal assistant  Ms Co pland, or if t hey were in any  way 
comparable w ith those of Ms Halfo rd. But in the pres ent c ase Mrs Brake was 
certainl y not in the s ame position as M s Halfo rd was in her case. In thes e 
circumstances I cannot regard Copland’s case as of any great assis tance in reso lving 
the present case. 
251. The third EC tHR case was Barbulescu v Roman ia, Applicat ion n o. 61496/08 ). In that 
case the applicant  had created a Yahoo Messenger account at work  on his employer’s 
instructions to answer custome rs’ enquiries  and was th e only  person  who kn ew the 
password , although  the em ployer had access to it, and  indeed did acces s it. Despite a 
ban on per sonal use of the internet at wo rk, he then used it for personal p urpos es. The 
employee was dismissed. He comp lained of a breach of Ar t 8. 
252. The majo rity of  the court held : 
“72. … Furtherm ore, [the court]  has held th at telephone  conv ersations are 
covered by t he notions of ‘private life ’ and ‘correspondence ’ within the 
mean ing o f Article 8 (see Roman Zakharov v. Russ ia [GC], no. 47143/06, §  
173, ECHR  2015). In  principle, thi s is also true wh ere telephone calls a re 
made  from or  received  on business p remises (see  Halford, cited above, § 44, 
and Amann  v. Switzerland [GC], no. 2 7798/ 95, § 44, ECHR 2000 -II). The 
same appli es to emails sent from t he wor kplace,  which enjoy similar 
protection under  Article 8, as does inf ormatio n derived fr om th e monitoring o f 
a person’s  internet use (see Copland , cited above, § 41 in fine ).

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
70 
 73.  It is cle ar from the Cour t’s case -law that commu nications from business 
premis es as w ell as from the home m ay be covered by the notions of ‘priva te 
life’ and ‘corre spond ence’ within t he meaning o f Article 8 of the Convention 
(see Halfor d, cited above, § 44; an d Copland, cited above, § 41). In order to 
ascertain whether the not ions o f ‘private lif e’ and ‘corresp ondence ’ are 
applicable, the Court has  on sev eral occasio ns ex amined whether  individuals  
had a reasona ble expectation t hat their privacy would be respect ed an d 
protected (ibid.; and as regards ‘private life ’, see also  Köpke v. 
Germany  (dec.) , no. 420/07 , 5 October 2010). I n that context, it ha s state d that 
a rea sonab le expectation  of privacy is a significant though not nec essarily 
conclusive factor (see  Köpke, cited above) .”  
253. Applying th ose principl es, the court noted that  insta nt mess aging s ervice s were just 
one kind of co mmunication enabling individ uals to lead  a private social l ife, and was  
‘corresponden ce’ within Art 8 , even when  sent from an employe r’s comp uter. Here 
the applican t’s employe r imposed a ban on using comp any re sources  for pe rsonal 
purposes , and there was a lso a system for moni toring employee s’ intern et use . Despit e 
knowing of  this ban (though not necessari ly of the monitor ing system , its e xtent  or 
nature) the applicant used the empl oyer’s system to exchang e mess ages of  a pers onal 
nature wit h family, some  of an intimate nature .  
254. The co urt continue d: 
“80.  It is open  to question  whether – and if so, to what e xtent – the 
employe r’s restrictive  regulations left the applicant with a reaso nable  
expectation of pri vacy. Be that  as it may, an employe r’s instructions cannot 
reduce private  social  life in the  work place to zero.  Respect for  private life and 
for the priva cy of correspondence continues to exist , even if these may be 
restricted in so  far as necessary . 
81.  In the  light of all the above consi derations, the Co urt concludes that th e 
appli cant’s commu nicat ions in the wo rkplace were  covered by th e concepts of 
‘private life ’ and ‘correspondence ’. Accor dingly, in the circumstances of the 
present case, Articl e 8 of the Co nventio n is ap plicable .” 
255. Acco rdingly, this was  not a case where the  court ’s applicatio n of Art 8 depended  on 
any reas onab le expecta tion of privacy, because t he court expressly did no t dec ide that 
any such expectat ion existed. That does not help me in  the a pplicat ion of the domestic 
English tort of bre ach of privacy, which , by vi rtue of the decis ions al ready r eferred to , 
including Mosl ey v News Group N ewspapers Ltd  [2008] EMLR 20,  and Racing 
Partnership v Sports Informa tion Serv ices [2020] EWCA Civ 130 0, does depend in 
the first instanc e on establishing  that very concept .  
256. Lastly,  the High Co urt d ecision  relied  on by the c laimants was made in the case o f 
Shepherd v Fox -Williams  [2014] E WHC 1 224 (QB). There , the claimant’s girlfri end 
was dismissed by her  emplo yer, a nd she brought employ ment proceedings ag ainst it. 
In th ose pr oceedin gs, the empl oyer disclosed ce rtain document s (described b y the 
judge as “ highly personal to  the claimant and  obviously confidential ”), which had 
been pr epared by the claimant a nd his  solici tors in relation to his own divorce 
proceedings. On th e evid ence th e judge held  that the claiman t had sent tho se 
documents to his girlfriend  on her personal e mail account,  for comm ent, and she had

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
71 
 forwarded  them to her work email account, so t hat sh e could  open them at work. She 
had not appreci ated that doing  this would r esult in a c opy b eing stored on her 
employe r’s server. This was how the do cuments came to b e in the defendan ts’ 
possession , and thereafter disclosed in the dismissal proceeding s.  
257. In separa te High Court procee dings brought by th e claimant  against th e emplo yer and 
the emplo yers’ solicito rs for deliv ery up and des truction of these  documents, the 
defendants accepte d tha t (subject to loss o f confidentiality i n the information ) the 
documen ts were  privil eged , and des troyed them. The cl aimant  did not need t o and d id 
not there after pursue the ap plication, e xcep t to obtain their costs.  This was resisted by 
the de fendants , on the basis that the substantive applic ation had not been  pursued,  and 
in any e vent would have fail ed, because confide ntiality had been los t when the 
document s wer e automaticall y copied ont o the employer ’s server.  
258. Simler  J, as she the n was,  said:  
“58. … T he Privileged Doc uments were gener ated in the course of a 
solicitor /clien t relationship . They  are presumed confidentia l and the privilege  
that atta ches to them  is a fundamental s ubstantive right. As a mat ter of law, Mr 
Jones’ proposition t hat by sending these documents to Ms Liebli ng’s per sonal 
email address, the cl aimant  is to be treated as  having waived his privilege in  
relation to her em ployer, go es too far. … It would be contr ary to the interes ts 
of th e administration of justice if priv ilege is regarded as waived in the se 
circum stances or treated as waived genera lly be cause a privileged d ocument is 
disclosed for a limi ted purpose by a pa rty who plainly would not contemplate 
doing anything which might ca use his privilege to be lost . The f act that the 
claimant  might not be  able to assert p rivilege against Ms Lieblin g does  not 
mean that he is taken to have waived privilege  more generally, or  in relati on to 
the de fendants specifical ly. 
[ … ]  
61. Nor am I per suaded that FJI’s electronic inform ation policy  helps in  this 
regard.  There is  no evid ence that the claimant had notice  or kn owledge  of the  
policy relied on by FJI. He is  not and has never been emplo yed by FJI. Given 
the terms of the policy , it is not sufficient for the purposes of this arg ument for 
the defenda nts to assert  that the  policy is an industry standard and  that 
everyo ne know s that employers have electronic infor mation policies of this 
kind.  The terms o f the policy make c lear that its purp ose is t o preserve privacy 
and confidential ity whilst enabling t he employer t o carry o ut legit imate 
monitoring and access ing of  elect ronically stor ed material for appropriate 
business purposes. It is not obv ious to me t hat a fair reading of the policy 
woul d have l ed the claimant to conclude that pr ivilege and confident iality in 
documents , sent to h is girlfriend ’s personal em ail bu t forw arded to her w ork 
email address  for a limited  purpose, would be invaded an d jeopardise d as a 
consequence . The fact that Ms Liebling  personally might not be able to as sert 
rights of privac y against FJI  does not  mean th at the claimant cannot asse rt 
rights to  confidentiali ty and privilege in respect of the Privileged Docu ments 
against FJI. Con fidentiality is not  lost simply becau se Ms Li ebling forwa rded 
the documents to h er work email.”

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
72 
 259. If I may respectfu lly say s o, this decision seems to me to be entire ly ort hodox. Where 
privileged (and therefore necess arily confidential)  communica tions are sh own or sent 
by the holder of the priv ilege to  another person in confidence for a  limited purpose 
without any inten tion to waiv e pri vilege, then normally it is  not w aived:  see eg 
Nationwide Building Society v Various  Solicitors [1999] PNLR 52, 7 2. The emplo yee 
had no intentio n of placing the d ocuments  on the empl oyer’s server  or otherwise of 
disclosing them to the empl oyer, and did not realise that this would be  the 
consequ ence of openin g them on her work email accoun t. Neither the claimant nor t he 
employee ever thought  that t he employer ’s IT p olicy wo uld mean that the claimant ’s 
privilege would be at risk.   
260. Moreover , that case was not about the claimant’ s expectat ion of  priva cy. Ins tead it  
was about  whet her the employee ’s actions in openi ng the d ocument s in th e 
employer’s mail a ccou nt caused  a loss of that confidentiality necess ary for privilege 
to subsist . That depended on her intention. But she never ev en thought  about  the 
possibil ity tha t the docu ments  would be copied  to the  employer’s server, so the fact 
that they ended up th ere could not  demo nstrate on her part an inten tion to give up that 
confidentiali ty. It was an a ccident that the employer obtained sight of the do cument s.  
261. In the pres ent case Mrs Brake was in a very different positio n. She was an employee , 
and knew that the  enquiries  account (to whi ch she k new others h ad unrestricted 
access) was saved  to a server, and that all her e mails , whether public or pri vate, would 
be stor ed on it. Despite this , she d eliberately  used the account  for no n-business 
comm unica tions , rather than the alo@axnoller.co.uk  account , which had been 
provided for personal emails  (or any other of  her p ersona l email  accoun ts). 
262. The defendants, o n the other  hand , relied o n the dec ision of Garnha m J in  Simpkin v 
The Berkeley Group Holding s plc [2017] 4 WLR 11 6. In that case, an employee sent 
an email from h is work email accou nt to his private email  account , atta ching t o the 
email a copy of a document p repare d on his work com puter, which he propos ed to 
send to his s olicitor in connec tion wi th hi s on going divorc e. T he employer 
subsequently dismissed the employ ee, and there were employment proceedings 
between them t hereaft er. In those proceedings, the empl oyer a dduce d this docum ent 
in evidence, and t he emp loyee sought to strike out this  part o f the evidenc e as 
privileged. Garnham J held that the application fail ed, because as agai nst the 
employer  the em ployee h ad no reasona ble exp ectation of privacy, and th erefor e the  
documents c ould no t be confidenti al as against the e mploy er. And, w ithout 
confidentiality, there c ould be no privilege . 
263. The jud ge gave four reasons  for reaching this conclusion:  
“31. It is common g round that it  is a p re-condition to a claim of privil ege t hat 
the docu ment in  question is co nfiden tial as again st the person agai nst who m 
the privilege is cl aime d (see  Three Rivers  at pa ragraph 24 and  BBGP v 
Babcock and Brown  [2010] EWHC 2176 (Ch)  at parag raphs 45-50). As Mr 
Malek contends, the touchst one of  confidentiality is a reasonable expect ation 
of privacy ( Campbell v MGN Ltd  [2004] UKHL 22 at paragraph 21 and 85). In 
my judgment, t he Synopsis was not confidential as aga inst the defendant.  
32. First, the cl aimant signed a copy of the company's IT policy  whic h made 
clear  that e mails sent and receiv ed on its IT system were the pr operty of

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
73 
 Berkeley. Berkeley 's IT department had access t o all the company's computers 
and email  accounts and did not n eed auth orisat ion bef ore acc essing their 
computers or a ccount s. Th e claimant's  employ ment contract m akes c lear that 
his emails were subje ct to m onitoring by Berkeley  without his consent.  
33. Sec ond, I accept Mr Mal ek's arguments that  the Synopsis was creat ed in 
the cour se of t he clai mant's employment. The Syno psis c ontai ned an analy sis 
of the defendant's  finan cial performa nce by its group f inance director, created 
on, and transmitted via, its IT system whilst the cl aimant was at its o ffice. He 
prepared it u sing the  defen dant's financi al information. It appears he pre pared  
it over the  course  of almost an h our wh ilst working at the defendant's  office s 
in the early mornin g of 11 August 2014. He prepa red it using the def endant's 
IT system and used the defendant' s email accoun t to em ail it to his personal 
account.  
34. Thir d, it is impossib le to m aintain that th e clai mant had any reasonable 
expecta tion of  privacy as regards t he p reparation of this docume nt. The 
claimant sav ed the Synopsis to his folder on one drive  of Berk eley's  centra l 
serve rs. As Mr Malek contends, t he cla imant  was, or sho uld hav e been, aware 
that do cuments in th at file were store d centr ally. The Synopsis wa s no t 
password protected and was not segregated f rom the claimant's work related 
documents.  
35. As the cl aimant would h ave been well aware, the co ntents  of his email 
account wo uld also have a ppeare d in his pers onal assistant's e mail ac count and 
she had dir ect access to his email folde r where this email a nd the Synopsis 
were stored. Even if she d id not in fact  have o ccasion  to look at those emails, 
the fac t tha t she had ac cess to  them undermine s the suggestion th at the 
claimant ha d a rea sonab le expec tation o f privacy as against the defe ndant. 
36. It is ack nowledged by the cl aimant's solicitors tha t neithe r the Synopsi s, 
nor the email under cover of wh ich it  was sent to his own acc ount, indicated  
on th eir face that  they were prepare d for t he purpose of seeking  legal advice. 
In my judgment , the fact that the computer used by th e claimant automaticall y 
produc ed a s tandard  Berkel ey footer does not assist t he cla imant . The purpos e 
of th at footer was t o prot ect Berkeley' s confidentiality not to protect the 
confident iality of Berkeley's employee s against their empl oyer.  
37. Fourth, i n my view, Mr Malek is right wh en he points to the third 
statement of Mr Simpk in as sugge sting that t he claimant was well a ware t hat 
he was no t entitled to priv acy in using the defendant's  IT systems. In that third 
statement the claimant  asserts that he se nt an email on 6 August  2014 fr om his  
person al emai l address to the same email  addre ss ‘because altho ugh I required 
a copy to be stored the co ntent was confiden tial an d for my lawy er and I  did 
not want to save a copy on my work computer ’. 
38. In those circ umstances I fail to see  how it can po ssibly be said  that the 
claimant had any reason able expectation of privacy in the docu ment p roduced 
on Be rkeley's IT system .”

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
74 
 264. It will be seen that that case differs factually from the present one in c ertain ways. 
First,  the employee  there  signed an I T poli cy maki ng clea r that emails on the 
employ er’s s ystem  belonged to  it, and his employmen t cont ract expressl y allowed for 
moni toring his emails wi thout co nsent. Neither of those things  is the case here. 
Second, the documen ts in Simpkin  were prepar ed in the co urse of  the em ployee’s 
employment. But t he argu ment here is not about d ocuments prepar ed or sent or 
recei ved on behalf o f the emplo yer, but those not so prepared, sent or received. Third, 
there wa s clear evidence in Simpkin that the employee  himself  recogn ised th at he w as 
not entitled to privacy in rel ation  to his empl oyer’s email account.  
265. On the  other hand, there are importan t elemen ts here that are the same as in Simpkin . 
First, the e mails c laimed to  be private to  Mrs Brake were  stored on the same s erver as 
the busines s em ails, and were not segregated  or differentiate d in an y way from them . 
In particular they were not themsel ves password ed. Seco nd, othe rs had access  to the 
enquiries ac count, in partic ular Rebecca H olt and Simon W indus. The fact  that Mrs 
Brake agr eed to this does not change the fact tha t she was not the  only p erson to have 
access. Third, Mr s Brake’s claimed pri vate ema ils did not bear any  label or oth er 
indication to sho w that they were , or were clai med t o be, priv ate.  
266. The judge relied on th ese thr ee feat ures in Simpkin  for his third pro position, that “ it is 
impossible to mai ntain that the c laimant had any reaso nable ex pectation of privacy  as 
regards t he preparation of t his docu ment. ” In my judgment t he po sition in the present 
case is a nalogo us. In additio n to this, Mrs Brake had the oppo rtuni ty to use her own 
private email ac counts  based on oth er domains, or her  “alo@” emai l accoun t based  on 
the axnoller domain. Before I  leave  the Simpki n case, I will note that the judge was 
speci ficall y refe rred to  the de cision in Shepherd v Fox Williams , con sidered it in some  
detail, and con cluded that it did not assi st the cla imant in  Simpkin. 
Conclusion on reasonable expectation  
267. Overall, taking into account all the circumstances of thi s case, my co nclusio n is that  
Mrs Brak e did no t have  a reasonable  expectation of pri vacy  in emails that s he 
received on an d sent fro m the enquir ies account. That m eans that  the clai m in bre ach 
of privacy must fail in any event , even without recourse to the o ther defences put 
forward  (some of which I h ave up held) .  
268. Howev er, eve n if I were wrong a bout the reaso nable  expectation  of privac y generally,  
on the facts that I have found, the only doc umen ts which would be private would be  
the 5511 already agreed to be destroyed, and the 4849 which (if there were a 
reasonabl e expec tation of privacy) would s till be potent ially subject to the iniquity 
defence, and therefore not l iable at this stag e to be the subject of an order for 
destruction.  In relation to those doc uments , there would have to be a trial of the 
iniquity d efence . In re lation to other d ocument s, there would need t o be the secon d 
stage of the enqui ry into the cause o f action in privac y, namel y, the balan cing 
exercise, which must focus intensely on the facts. I assume (as do the defendants) that 
that also woul d be c arried out in the trial of the iniquity defence . All I can say now  is 
that, given that  I have not seen th e documents in que stion (w ith very few  exceptions), 
I am not in a position to conduct that exercise  at present .  
Misuse of information

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
75 
 Tests to apply  
269. Given my  finding s on the neces sary quality of confidence and the abs ence of 
circumstances importing an obl igation of confidence (in relatio n to b reach of 
confidence) , and on the reason able expectation of privacy  (in relation to breach of 
privacy) , it is not necessar y for me to a ddress the question of misuse  of any private or 
confidenti al infor mation.  However, in case the matter shou ld go further, I  should say 
this. The claimants in their closing submissions said that for  
“claims of a misuse of private information, t he tes t has b een des cribed as 
‘whether a reasonable person  of ordinary sensibilities, if placed in the same 
situation as the subject of the disclosure, rather than the recipient, would find 
the disclosure offensive ’.”  
270. This is said to be derived from the opinion of Lor d Sumpt ion in Campbell  v MGN  
[2004] 2 A C 457. But Lord Sumption was  not a judge at the tim e of Campbell , and he 
did not take part  in the proceedings , even as counsel . I think that this must be a 
reference to the judgment of  Lord Sumption  (with whom the major ity of the court 
agreed)  in the case of Khuja v Ti mes New spapers Ltd  [2019] AC 161, wher e he sa id: 
“21. In Campbell v MGN Ltd  [2004] 2 AC 457 , the House of Lords expanded 
the scope of the equitable action for breach of confidence by absorbing into it 
the v alues  underlying articles 8 and 10 of  the E uropean  Conven tion on Human 
Rights, thus effe ctively  recognising a qualified common law right of privacy. 
The Appellate Committee was divided on the availability of the right in the 
circumstances of that case, but  was agreed that the right was in pri nciple  
engage d if in  respect of the disclosed facts  the pe rson in question had a 
reasonabl e expectation of privacy. The test was whether a reasonable person 
of ordinary sensibilities, if placed in the same situation as the s ubject of the 
disclosure, rather  than the rec ipient,  would find the disclosure offe nsive. The 
protection of reputation is the primary function of the law of defamation. But 
although the ambit of the right of privacy is wider, it provides an alternativ e 
means of protecting reputation whic h is a vailabl e even when the matters 
published are true.” 
271. In the decision of the House of Lords in  Campbell v MGN Ltd  [2004] 2 AC 457 , there 
was some discussion of the judgment of Gleeson CJ  in the High Court of Austral ia in 
Australian Broadcasting Corpora tion v  Lenah Game Me ats Pty Ltd  (2001) 185 ALR 
1, [42], where the judge used some  of the s ame words as are above  suggested . But in 
fact the quotation is different, and (importantly ) the word “offensive ” is qualified by 
the adj ective “highly ”. Even more imp ortant ly, the  House of Lords  in that case  did not 
lay down that the test was whether or no t a reasonable person would find the 
disclosure offensive.  As Lady Hale said:  
“135. An objective reasonable expectation test  is m uch sim pler and clearer 
than the test  somet imes qu oted fr om the judgmen t of Gleeson CJ  …” 
272. So, with very great respect, I do not  think that Lord Sumption ’s summary of  the 
decision in Campbell  does justice to the House of Lords. But , nevertheless, the  
majori ty of t he Supreme Court, after citati on and consid eration  of Campbell , has

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
76 
 spoken. As Lo rd Reid said in Carl Zeiss Stiftung v Rayner and Ke eler Ltd  [1967] 1 
AC 853 , 924, admittedly in a different context,  
“the law of England is what the House of Lords has said it  is …” 
It is therefore my duty  to ap ply tha t. 
273. As for the test in relation to a cl aim for breach of confidence,  in Imerma n the Court of 
Appeal said:  
“69. In our view, it would be a breach of confidence for a defendant, without 
the authority of the cl aimant,  to examine, or to m ake, retai n, or supply copies 
to a third party of, a document  whose contents are, and were (or ought  to have 
been) appreciated by the defendant to be, confidential to the claimant. It is of 
the essence of the claimant's right to confide ntiality that he can  choose 
whether,  and, i f so, t o whom and in what circumstance s and on what terms, to 
reveal the info rmation which has the protection of the confidence. It seems to 
us, as a matter of principle, that, again in the absence of any d efence on the 
particular fa cts, a cla imant who est ablishe s a right of confidence in cert ain 
information contained in a document  should be able to restrain any threat by 
an unauthorised defendant to look at, copy, distribute any copies of, or to 
communicate , or ut ilise the contents o f the docu ment ( or any copy), and also 
be able to enforce the  return (or destruction) of any such do cument or copy. 
Without the court having the power to grant such relief, the information will, 
through the unauthorised act of th e defen dant, either lose it s confiden tial 
characte r, or w ill at least be at risk of doin g so. The claimant should not be at 
risk, through the unauthorised act of the defendant, of having the 
confidentiality of the information lost, or even potentially lost .” 
Appl ication to facts  
274. The defendants have eith er destroyed, or agreed  to destr oy, docu ments accepted to be 
private to the claimants. In these circumstances it is difficult to see that there is any 
appreciable damage suffered by the  claimants  in relation to thes e docu ments : cf 
Sedley LJ in White v Withers  LLP [2009] 3 FCR 435 , [72]. The defendants retained 
the 4849 documents poten tially s ubject to the in iquity defence. I cannot decide now 
that that was wrong. That would need to be tried.  
275. As to tran smissio n to la wyers and staff , this w as done for the purpos es of being 
advised in r elation  to actual or contempla ted proceedings. No onw ard dis tribution 
beyond lawyers and their staff under similar duties of confidentiality has been shown  
(for the avoidanc e of do ubt, I include Mrs Palmer in t he latter category) . In my 
judgment t hat is no t wrong . If you  canno t tell yo ur lawyer , in confidence , what  has 
happened, you cannot be properly advised . No reasonable person of ordinary 
sensibilities would be caused offence by  this. Indeed, in my judgment, it would cause 
offence if you could not ask your lawyer s to advise  you. 
276. In White v Withers LLP [2009] 1 F LR 383, a wife who launched matrimonial 
proceedings but feared that her husband would hide his assets from her took and 
passed his private a nd confidential documents to her solicitors. The husband sued the 
wife and he r solicit ors for breach of confidence a nd breach of privacy, and also in the

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
77 
 tort of conversion, because some of the documents were originals. The husband 
subsequentl y discontinued the claim against the wife . The solici tors applied to strike  
out the cl aims. The  judge did so. Eady J  said:  
“8. Mr Sherborne submits that t he mere receipt of d ocuments by the sol icitors 
from their clien t, and their co ntinued retention  in con nection with the 
matrimonial proceedings, simply cannot gi ve rise to a caus e of action .  Nor 
could the fa ct that such documen ts had been read and noted in  connection with 
the litigation.  While  it is true that there h as beco me recog nised over the la st 
few years a wrong actionable in English law described as “misu se of private 
information”, following  from the consideration of rel evant principles by their 
Lordships in Campbell v  MGN Ltd  [2004] AC 457, it would not be pos sible b y 
any st retch of the imag ination  to characterise the solicitors’ receipt and 
retention of the documents fro m Mrs White  in that way. ” 
277. The husband appealed aga inst the strike out. In the Court of Appeal, Ward LJ said:  
“23. If Mr Michael Crystal Q.C. did  not concede that t he claim fo r damag es 
for breach  of conf idence and privacy could never succeed, he was quite c lear 
that h e need no t troubl e’ us with that elemen t of the claim. In my jud gment he 
was clearly right to take that course: Mrs White's communic ation of that 
confi dential/priv ate inf ormation to her soli citors for their use in the litigation 
could never be c haracterise d as misu se of it . 
[ … ] 
The claim for infringement of the claim ant's r ights in confidence and privacy 
and for misuse of his private  information  
40. Mr Michael Cry stal, c orrectly in my view,  does not pursue this claim any 
longer and I say no mor e about it. ” 
278. It is right how ever that I s hould say  that, in Imerman v Tchen guiz, the Court of Appeal 
said:  
“71. … It is only fair to mention, t hat in White v With ers the appe al agai nst 
Eady J’s decision was not pursued on the issue of  confidenti ality: [2010] 
EWCA Civ  1122, [2 010] 1 F LR 859,  para [40]. Ward LJ’s obiter approval 
(para [23]) of what Eady J said related to the suggestion of misuse by  the 
solicitors .” 
279. I am troubled  by this characterisation of the comment of Ward LJ in White v Withers  
as refer ring to “the s uggestion  of misu se by the solicitors ”. What Ward L J actually  
said was : 
“Mrs White's communication of that confidential/private info rmation to her 
solicitors for t heir us e in the litigation could never be characterised as misuse 
of it”. 
As I rea d it, this commen t clearly relates on its fac e to Mrs White’s communication , 
and not to what the solicitors did with it.  I do wonder whether the Court of Appeal

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
78 
 may have mis read wha t Ward LJ actually said . He clearly thought  that the 
communication by Mrs W hite to  her solicito rs of co nfidential information  for their 
advice was not a wrong , even though  at first instance  Eady J had been concentrati ng 
on the receipt by the s olicit ors. In any event, the point is clear. It is not wrong in itself  
for parties to sh are confide ntial information belonging to another person with their 
legal advisers for the purposes of being advised.  
280. The same is true in prin ciple  for the press agent Mr Haw ker. Th e only difference is 
that there will no legal privileg e attac hing to the de fenda nts’ own commun ication s 
with him  (it may be d ifferent if i t is the lawyers ’ communicat ions with him : there was 
no evidence as to exactly how this happened ). In my judgme nt it i s not misuse of 
confi dential inform ation or breach of privacy  to pass priva te or  confi dential 
information, in confidence, and not to be disclosed further, to  a profes sional adviser 
where  there is a reasonable need for  such advice. I find that the de fendant s did have  
such a nee d in the circu mstanc es. 
281. Transmiss ion of information to  the truste e in bank ruptcy, Mr Swift, the liquidat ors of 
the PWF partnership, and to Mrs Br ehme, stand s on a different footing. Inform ation 
was not being passed to them in or der for  the defendants to be  advised  on th eir ow n 
positions . It was being passed t o the se thi rd partie s potentially for their own purposes. 
However, there are two distinct a spects to the position of Mr Swift  and what  the 
defendants did . First of all,  they told hi m that there were box es of document s 
appa rently belong  to the  Brakes to be found  in th e cottage . As a result,  Mr Swift  
arrang ed for them to be collected  and taken awa y. In my judg ment,  merely informing 
the tru stee in bankruptcy that boxes of materia l appar ently belonging to  the claimants 
were to be found in t he cott age does not a mount  to th e transmi ssion of information, 
confiden tial or otherwise, of  the claimant s to th e trustee. It is therefore  neither a 
breach  of priv acy nor a breach of confidence  by the d efendants . 
282. The second  aspect concer ns in formation whic h the d efendants  actually passed  to Mr 
Swift in response to requests fr om him to do  so. In relation to the se requests, reliance 
is placed on sec tion 366 of the Insolvency Act 1986.  This releva ntly reads  as follows:  
“366.— Inquiry into ba nkrup t's dealings a nd prop erty. 
(1) At a ny time aft er a bank ruptcy order has been made the  court may, on the 
application of the  official receiver or the trustee of  the bankrup t's esta te, 
summon to appear before it — 
[ … ] 
(c) any person appear ing to the cou rt to be able to gi ve info rmation concer ning 
the ba nkrupt or the bankrupt's dealings, affa irs or prope rty. 
The court may require any  such person as is mentioned in  paragraph ( b) or (c ) 
to submit [a witness  statemen t verif ied by a statement of  truth] to the  court 
containing a n accou nt of his deal ings with the bankru pt or to produce any 
documents  in his poss ession or under his control re lating to the  bankrupt or the 
bankrupt's de alings, affairs or property. ”

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
79 
 283. It will b e seen that this section does not confer a  powe r on the trust ee in b ankruptcy 
directly to req uire thir d parties to produce informati on in their possession . Instead , it 
empowe rs the court on the application  of the trus tee to r equire third parties to produce  
such i nformation. However, typically , trustees in bankruptcy  have limited  resourc es 
for maki ng court applications, and prefer to op erate where po ssible by agreement. 
Moreover,  an informal and friendly appro ach is often  more pr oductive than a formal 
and an tagonis tic one. So it is har dly surprising  that in this case Mr Swif t made 
informa l requests to the de fendants by reference to secti on 366, withou t actually 
making formal appli cations to the court.  If the tr ustee ha d made an ap plication to the 
court, and t he cour t had made an order u nder the secti on, th e claimants c ould no t 
complain at the d efenda nts’ comp liance with it.  (I should say that it is not  an objection 
that the claiman ts have  been discharged  from bankru ptcy. The word ‘bankrupt ’ in the 
section  includes a bankrupt once dischar ged, and so th e jurisdiction cont inues t o exist:  
Oakes  v Simms [1997] BPIR  499, CA . Nor is it an objecti on that the in formation 
concerned came into existence after the discharge: the section requir es only that it 
concerns “the b ankrupt  or the bankrupt's de alings, affair s or p roperty ”. The  bankru pt 
is now a di schar ged ra ther than  an undischarged bankrupt, but  Oakes shows t hat the 
section applies to dis charged as to undischarged bankrupts .)  
284. On the othe r hand,  it does not follow f rom this  that a failure to ob tain an order means 
that complian ce with a request pro perly  made must be a  breach of privacy or 
confiden ce. The claimants say in closing that a fail ure to obtain an order means that , if 
the co urt does  not make an order , the exce ption i n article 8 (2) cannot  apply . However, 
for this purpose  “the law” includes t he common law, and n ot just t he statute law.  
Consi stently with the policy behin d section 366, that trustees in bankru ptcy should 
have the maximum available info rmation about the ban krupt’s estate , in order to 
protect the interests of credi tors i n the bankr uptcy, and taking a realistic view of the 
resour ces available to trustees in bankruptcy, I hold that it is not a brea ch of privacy 
or confidence for third parti es on re quest from a trustee in bankruptcy  to supply that 
information which  the court  would have  ordere d to be suppl ied if an applicat ion had 
been  made (I am not now dealing with privileged  information, to which d ifferent 
considerations may apply) .  
285. On the informat ion a vailabl e to me in this case,  and taking into account the detailed  
submi ssions made  to me on  behalf of the clai mants,  I have no doubt  that the 
information supplied in relation to the requests made  would have be en ordered to be 
supplied . The f act that  some e mails w ere sent to Mr Swift ’s office after his removal 
from offic e does not change  matters.  They were not sent  to Mr Swift personall y, for 
his own amusement. They were sent for the benefit of the ba nkrupt estate, to be 
passed on to the new t rustees.  
286. The cl aimants  make an argument in closing submissions (at [30]) that the defe ndants 
should not have  had these documents in the fir st place , and refer  to a passage in 
Toulson & Phipps , Confidentiality , [5-053], who in turn rely on a dictum in Hilton  v 
Barker Booth and E astwood  [2005] 1 WLR  567. This is a dictum  of Lord  Walke r of 
Gesting horpe (at [35]) in the context of a vendor entering into two irreconcilable 
contracts of sale.  Lord Walker said:  
“35. If a house owner contracts to sell his house t o one pu rchaser f or £240 ,000 
and then a w eek later contracts to sell it t o another pu rchaser  for £ 250,000, he 
assumes two contractual duties which ar e on the face of it irreconcilable,

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
80 
 unless the seller has grounds for rescinding either contract, or can pe rsuade 
one or oth er purc haser to release him from his obligation. That is  so whether 
he ente rs int o the second  contrac t with his eyes open, in the ho pes of making a 
larger profit, or whether (rather improbably) he does so inadvertently. It is no 
answer for  him to say to ei ther pu rchaser: I am sor ry, I am obligated to 
another. H is dilemma i s his o wn fau lt (the phra se used by Lord Cozens -Hardy 
MR in  Mood y v Cox [1917] 2 Ch 71, 81, a case to which I shall return). ” 
287. This is a different context from our case , and in my judgment the ana logy is inexact . 
Nevertheless, if applied to the present case , it would me an that the defendant s cannot 
excuse a n initial  wrong of breac h of privacy or confiden ce by saying th at they 
subsequently  acquired  an obligation to pass the emails to the relevant insolvency 
office h older , or (as  here)  are otherwise jus tified in resp onding  positively to a requ est 
from such an office holder . But that does not mean that the d efendants commit a 
further  wrong in passing the emails to the insolvency office holder.  The offi ce holder 
can ask  whoever has the information to supply it.  
288. In principle, I con sider t hat the s ame result should obtain i n relation to in formation 
supp lied to the liquidators of  the PWF partnership , and for the same policy re asons.  
Given that Mrs Br ehme wa s the largest cre ditor in the liq uidation and that any benefit 
to her woul d benefit al l the cre ditors of the partnership,  I consider that the supply of  
information relevant to h er claim in the liquidation falls into the same category, and 
cannot be complai ned of by the cla imants. It has n ot been shown that any information 
suppli ed by the de fendants to Mrs Brehme falls outsid e the category o f that which i t 
would be appropriate to pass on request to the liquidators of the PWF pa rtnership.  
Any claim bas ed on disclosure to the liquidators or t o Mrs Brehme must equa lly fail.  
Conclusion on misuse  
289. In the pr esent case, therefore  there was neither breach of confidence nor breach of  
privacy.  As I have already said, I do not consider that the use/disclosure by t he 
defendants of information from the enquiri es account, in the contexts in which they 
occurr ed, would  have cause d offence to a reas onable person of ordinary sensibilities.  
Damages  
290. If however  I were wrong on misuse, and what was done amounted to a breach o f 
confi dence or breach of privacy, it would have been nec essary t o assess  damages . I 
would ha ve taken into accoun t the guid ance give n in Richard  v BBC  [2019 ] Ch 169 , 
where Mann J said:  
“350. The following  factors shou ld be ta ken into account in assessing  general 
damages in this case:  
(a) Damages can and should b e awarde d for di stress, damage  to he alth, 
invasion of Si r Cliff’s privacy ( or depriving hi m of the right to control the use  
of his private informat ion), and dam age to h is dignity, status and reputati on. 
(Gulati’s case in the Court of Appeal [ 2017 ] QB 149, para 45; Gulati’s case 
[2016 ] FSR 12 at first instance; and the discussion above about rep utation.)

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
81 
 (b) The general adverse e ffect on his lifestyle  (which will be a fun ction of  the 
matters in (a)).  
(c) The nature and content of the private information reve aled. Th e more 
private and sig nificant the information, the greate r the e ffect on the subj ect 
will be (or will be likely to be). In this case it wa s extremely s erious. It was  
not merely the fact that  an all egation had been made. The fact that the  police 
were inves tigating  and even cond ucting  a search gave signi ficant emphasis to 
the underlying fact of that an allegation had been made.  
(d) The scope o f the publica tion. Th e wider the publication, the gr eater  the 
likely invasion and the greater the e ffect on t he indiv idual. 
(e) The present ation of the publication. Sensationa list trea tment might  have a 
greater e ffect, and amount to a more serious invasion , than a more  measure d 
publication. ” 
291. But, without a trial o f the iniquity defence, it is impossible  to assess  damages in 
relation to the document s said to be subject  to that defence. It is moreover n ot strictly 
necessary to consider damages in relation to the remainde r. But, bearing in mind the 
factor s set out by Mann J, I would have considered that this was a ca se for (at best) 
limited damag es. It is not a phone  hack ing or cel ebrity exposure case.  It is not a ca se 
of sensationalist (or indeed  any) publicat ion of private information in the me dia. Such 
review  and use of the material as there may have been was in pursuit of otherwi se 
legitimate ob jectives, namely the defence in good faith  of legal right s, and was 
restricted to  those (such as legal advisers) who  had a need to know . This case seem s 
to me to fall close t o, if not within,  the category adverted to by  Sedley LJ in White v 
Wither s LLP  [2009 ] 3 FCR 435 , where he said:  
“72. … What w ill matter is that, provided the docum ent is not obviously off 
limits (as in my present view Le tty's letter was) and  provide d that,  whether or 
not copied, it is promptly returned (as the material document s were not) , there 
will b e no appreciable damage.  …” 
292. I also bear i n mind the comments of L ord Nicholls  (dissenting in the result)  in 
Campbell  v MGN  where he sai d: 
“33. In reac hing thi s overall conclusion I have well in mind the distress that 
publication of  the article on 1 February 2001 must have caused Mis s 
Campbell. Pu blic exposure of this so rt, especially for someone striving to cope 
with a seriou s medical con dition, would a lmost in evitably be extremely 
painful. But it is right to recognise the source of  this pain an d distress. First, 
Miss Campbell realis ed she had bee n betrayed by an associa te or fellow 
sufferer. Someone whom she trusted had told the newspaper  she was  attend ing 
Narc otics Anonymous meetings. This sense of betrayal, and consequential 
anxie ty about cont inuing to attend Narcotics Anonymous me etings, flowed  
from her becoming aware  she had been betrayed. The newspaper articles were 
only the means  by which sh e becam e aware of her betrayal. Secondly, Miss 
Campbell realised her addiction was now p ublic knowled ge, as was the fact 
she was undergoing treatment. She  realised also that it w as now public 
knowledge that she had repeatedly lied. Thi rdly, as alre ady ment ioned, Miss

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
82 
 Cam pbell would readily feel she was being harassed by the 'Mirror' employing  
a photograph er to 'spy' on her.  
34. That Miss Campb ell should suf fer real distress under all these heads is 
wholly understandable. But in respect of none of th ese caus es of di stress does 
she have reason for complaint against the newspaper for misuse of pr ivate 
informa tion. Against this background I find it  difficult to envisage Miss 
Campbell s uffered any significant additional distress based on publ ic 
disclosure  that he r chosen  form o f treatment was attendance at Narcotics 
Anonymous meetings .” 
293. In my judgme nt, if contra ry to what I have said the claimants had established a claim 
and compensable loss, the fa ct of having established publicly that the def endants  had 
been wrong t o deal with the emails in the way that they did, together with an award o f 
£5,000 (in total) , and an order that their cos ts be pai d, wou ld be an adeq uate response  
by the law to what had happened here.   
PROCURING A BREACH OF CONTRACT  
294. There is also a cla im again st the defendants for procuring a breach o f the contract  (the 
non-disclos ure agreement of 201 4) between Mrs Brake an d Allen Computin g 
Service s. The claimants rely on OBG Ltd v Allan [2008] 1 AC 1, HL.  There the House 
approved the state ment by Lord Watson i n Allen  v Flood  [1898] AC 1 , 107, that 
“He who wilfully induces another t o do an unlawful act  which, but for his 
persuasion, would o r might n ever have been committed, is rightly held to be 
responsible for the wrong he has procured .” 
295. One question fo r the Ho use of Lords in OBG  was the degree of knowledge of the 
contract  neede d for the purpose of  this tort . Lord Hoffma nn said:  
“40. The question of  what counts as knowledge for the pur poses of liability for 
inducing a breach of contract has also been the  subject  of a c onsistent line of 
decisions. In  Emerald Construction Co  Ltd v Lowt hian [1966] 1 WL R 691, 
union officials thre atened a bui lding contrac tor with a strike unless he 
terminate d a sub -contract for the supply of labour. The defendants  obviously 
knew that there w as a contract - they wanted it terminated - but the cou rt 
found th at they did not know its terms and, in part icular, how soon it could  be 
terminated. Lord Denning MR said (at pp  700-701) 
‘Even if they did not know the actual te rms of the co ntract, but had the 
means of knowledge - which they deliberately disre garded - that would 
be enou gh. Like the man who turns a blind eye.  So here, if the officers 
deliberately sought to g et this contract terminated, heedless of its 
terms, regar dless whether  it was terminat ed by breach or not, they 
would do wrong. For it is un lawful for a third person t o procure a 
breach of contr act knowingl y, or reckles sly, indifferent whether it is a 
breach or not ’.” 
296. Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead agreed. He said:

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
83 
 “192. The ad ditional , necess ary factor is the defendant's intent. He is liable if 
he intended  to persuade the  contracting party to breac h the contra ct. 
Intention al interference presupposes knowledge  of the contract. With that 
knowledge the defendant proce eded to induc e the ot her cont racting party to 
act in a way the defendant knew was a breach of that party's obl igations under 
the contract . If the def endant delibe rately turned a blind -eye and proceed ed 
regardless he may be treated as having intended the co nsequence he brought 
about. A  desire to inj ure the claimant is not an essential ingredient of this tort. ” 
297. The other members  of the Ho use also agreed. In the present ca se there is no doubt that 
Dr Guy knew  of the non -disclosure agreement by the time he vis ited M r Allen and 
pressed him to change the passwords on the accounts.  As the authorities show, i t does 
not mat ter whether he knew the exact de tails by then. But it is necessary t o show that 
what Mr Allen did was a breach of his contract with Mrs Brake.  I have a lready 
referr ed to this agreement  in some detail (see at [ 60], [115]ff, [243]ff above).  It is 
clear that Mr Allen did not breach his  agreement w ith Mrs Brake by c hanging the 
passwords. He promised to  keep confidential Mrs Brake ’s confidential information. 
But the accoun ts belon ged to the company, by whom Mr Allen was also retained, and 
he was oblig ed to unloc k them for his empl oyer. The cla im for procuring a bre ach of 
contract also fails.  
THE POSITION OF MR B RAKE  
298. I should say  somethin g in relation to the pos ition of Mr B rake in this litigation. He 
was an original claimant , but there is no claim (or evidence  adduced in support of  any 
claim) that he ever used t he enqu iries account . The claimants respond that this point 
has never  previous ly been raised  in corres ponde nce or a t any he aring. Moreover, Mr 
Brake was protected just as much as Mrs  Brake by the interim in junction granted by  
Mr Jarvi s QC. I accept all this. At the same time, I have to  deal, not wit h a claim to 
interim reli ef on app lication , as Mr Jarvis Q C ha d to, but  with on e to final relief at 
trial. And I have to deal  with the claims as pr esented to me.  
299. I have no doubt that it see med sensible to join Mr  Brake  at the outset , when the facts 
were n ot fully known, and the claimants would hav e wanted to avo id any techni cal 
problems arising from a failure to join some one who might be a joint own er of 
relevant rights. But the fact is that  no such problems have presen ted themselves , and 
the parties might  well have agreed to  a discontinua nce of hi s separate clai m. 
However, if a technical point is being taken by the defendants, then I also accept tha t 
a small numbe r of documents  in the bundle  from the enquiries account d o refer to Mr 
Brake, for example in r elation to his bankruptcy , and that is suff icient in my ju dgment 
to jus tify his  having been joined , even though the claim ultimately fails . At all even ts 
I am not  prepared to dismiss his cla im separately from that  of Mr s Brake.  I dismiss his 
claim on the b asis that his claim can be no better than t hat of Mrs Brak e, and stands  or 
falls with hers.  
OTHER MATTERS  
Remedies  
300. The defen dants have agreed to destroy 5511 emai ls from the enquiries account , in 
accor dance with the ord er of 28 November 2019 of Mr Jarvis QC , as varied by the

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
84 
 agreem ent of the part ies. There is therefore no ne ed for eith er an injunc tion or an 
order for destru ction. The claimants are not entitled to a ny other reme dy. 
List of issues  
301. Earlier  I set out the  list of issues which w as submitted to the court  by the parties . 
Whilst I consider that the judgment I have given p rovides  a sufficient answer  to thes e 
issues, I will for the sake of convenience set out my answers to them here in summary 
form , together with appropriate  paragraph numbers for ease of reference . But, to the 
extent that there is any conflict between the te xt of t he judgment and the 
(summarised) responses below, the judgment prevails. The issu es were as follows:  
The context to the Enquiries Account  
 
1. When w as the domain n ame ‘axn oller.co.uk’ set up and for whom?  
 
20 October 2009, for Mrs Brake. See [50]. 
 
2. When was the Enquiries Account set up and when were the first emails sent 
to/from that Acc ount?  
 
The first account using th e add ress enquiries@ axnoller.co.uk  was set up in 
April 2011 for the PWF partnership  (see ([55]), and the first (and only) email 
shown to have been  sent to it  was sent in Febr uary 2015 ( see [61]). The second  
email account using that address was se t up in Aug ust 2015 for  Sarafin a (see 
[75]), and the first email sent to it was on 15 August 201 5. 
3. To whom do the domain name and/or the Enquiries Account belong (and to 
whom have they  belonged since their creation)?  
 
The domain name belonged beneficially  to Mrs Brake i n 2009  (see [ 201]), to 
the PWF partnership from February 2010 (see [ 202]), otherw ise to Mrs 
Brake’s trustee in bankrup tcy from May 2 015 (see [ 203]), and subject to that 
from August 2015 or at the latest Febru ary 2017 to Sarafin a/AEL  (see [204]-
[208]). The registra tion in the name of Mrs Brake in 2019 made no difference 
to the benefi cial owner ship (see [209]). 
The first enquiri es account belonged to the PW F partnership fro m creation in 
April 2011 (see ([211]). The second enquiri es account belonged to  Sarafin a 
from c reation in August 2015 , or at least from Febr uary 2017  (see [ 212]). 
4. Was the Enqu iries Account primarily used a s SPL/AEL’s main business 
email address? Was it hel d out to the world as such?  
 
Yes, and yes (as to t he second  enquiries  account) (see [7 8]). 
 
5. Did SPL/AEL pay all costs and expenses associated with the domain name 
and the Enq uiries Account between the tim e they were set up and 8 
November 2018?

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
85 
  
Yes, and yes (as to the second enquiries acco unt) (see [ 75], [79]-[82]). 
 
6. Who had a ccess to the En quirie s Account, for what purposes and to what 
extent did they use the Enquirie s Accou nt for personal rather than 
business purposes?  
 
As to the second enquiries accou nt, Mrs Brake, Rebecca Holt  (see [ 82]-[83], 
[110]), and Simon Windus (see [1 10]). Mrs Brake us ed the  account for 
personal purposes  (see [ 78], [110]). I have found that about a  sixth of t he 
emails in the second  account were not business emails  (see [1 90]). There is no 
evidence that M s Holt or Mr  Windus used the account for personal p urposes  
(see [1 10]). 
7. What was the purpose of the passwords to the Enq uiries Account, the 
Personal  Accounts and the Fasthosts Accoun t, who held those 
passwords, and was SPL/AEL en titled to instruct (i) ACS to change th e 
passwords to the Enquiries Account an d/or (ii) emplo yees ( including 
Mrs Brake) to provide it (SPL/AEL) with the passwords?  
 
Mrs Brake held the p asswords to the Enq uiries Account, the Personal 
Accounts and the Fastho sts Account , and gave them to Mr Allen . The 
passwords  were intended to protect  the informatio n in t hem for the benefit  of 
those ent itled to the  relevant account.  SPL/AE L was e ntitled to  instruct (i) 
ACS to cha nge the passwords , and to instruct ( ii) employe es to provide it with 
the passwords (see [240]). 
8. Did the Guy Parties invite th e Brakes’ trust ee in bankruptcy or the 
liquidators of the Partnership to sell to AEL the w ebsite 
www.axnol ler.co.uk, the associated  domains and the email accounts 
including the E nquiries Account?  
 
No (see [ 141]). 
 
Confidentiality and privacy  
 
9. Was there a reasonable expe ctatio n of confidentiality in respect of the 
Enquiries Account as a whole, save fo r Booking  Emails (as defined in th e 
APoC )?  
 
No (see [ 232]).  
 
10. Was there a reason able expectation of privacy in respect of the Enquiries 
Account as a whole, sa ve for Booking Emails  (as defined in the APoC)?  
 
No (see [ 267]).  
 
11. In answering issues 9 and 10 above, wh at effect do the followin g contracts 
have:

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
86 
  
(1) The terms of the Brakes’ emp loyment by SPL/AEL and/or 
Chedington.  
 
Clause 16 is a factor (see [2 41]). 
 
(2) The warranties in  the S PA. In particular, did Mrs Foster warrant 
that the Enquiries Account belonge d to SPL/AEL in the SPA?  
 
Yes. See [10 1]-[108]. 
 
(3) The A CS Confid entiality Agreement. In particular, is  the 
Enquiries Account within the scope  of the ACS Confidentiality 
Agreement? If so, was it b reache d? 
 
None, no  and no  (see [2 44]-[245], [297]). 
 
12. Are any of the documents in the Enquiries Account private and c onfidential 
to the Brakes ?  
 
 No (see [2 32], [2 67]), but the defendants have agreed to  delete 5511 as 
private , subject to reason able expectat ion o f privacy (see [1 90]). 
Guy Parties’ use  of mater ial fro m the Enquiries Account  
  
13. What were the Guy Parties’ r easons for see king access to, copying and 
denyin g the Brakes access to the Enquiries Ac count?  
 
The defendants wanted to access t heir own busi ness information and move on, 
removing the claimant s’ person al information from the account : see [1 25], 
[137]-[138] . 
14. What use have the Guy Parties made of informa tion in the Enquiries 
Account and with whom  have they shared that information?  
 
See [135]-[138] , [142], [149] -[157] . 
 
15. Was any of the information f ound to  have been used at issue 14 above, 
confidential or private to  the Brakes?  
 
See [1 90], [232], [267]. 
 
16. What offers did the Guy Parties make to  the Brakes (and on what terms) for 
them to remo ve any person al emails in the Enquiries Account? Were 
those offers reasonable and was the withdrawal of those offers 
reasonable?  
 
See [1 22]-[125].

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
87 
 17. Did t he Guy Parties r etain any emails or copies of emails fr om the Personal 
Accounts?  
 
No (see [1 40]). 
 
Miscellaneous  
 
18. For th e purpose of a claim in conf identiality or  privacy are any of the 
following provisions relevant in law and/or actionable:  
 
(1) Sections 1 and 2 of the Comp uter Misuse  Act 1990;  
No, see [226]. 
 
(2) The General Data Protection Regulation 2016;   
No, see [226]. 
 
(3) The Pr otection from Harassment Act 1997;  
No, see  [227]. and  
 
(4) Articles 8 and 6  of the European C onvention on Human R ights?  
No, see [2 25]. 
 
 
19. If so, have the Guy Parti es breached those provisions?  
Not applicable.  
  
 
Preliminary Issue on Iniquit y/Public Inte rest Defence  
 
20. On the facts and matters pleaded by the  Guy Parties at paragraphs 16 -17, 
19-47 and 75 of the  Defence,  is an in iquity or public interest defenc e 
available to them in law?  
 
Yes (see separate  judgment).  
.  
Remedies  
 
21. Are the Brakes entitled to d amage s and, if so, in what amount?  
 
No (see [ 289]), but cf [293] . 
 
22. Are the Brakes entitled to a final injunction and, if so, in respect o f what 
document s? 
 
No (see [28 9], [300] ). 
 
23. Are the  Brakes  entitled to an order for destruction and, if so, in respect of 
what documents?  
 
No (se e [28 9], [300] ).

HHJ Paul Matthews  
Approved Judgment  Brake and A nother v Guy and  Others  
 
88 
 CONC LUSION  
302. In the result, I dismiss the claim . It is the refore not necessary to go on to try t he 
‘iniquity def ence’. I am ve ry grateful to  all counsel and s olicitors for thei r hard work 
in pre paring for and running this complex and difficult trial. I should be grate ful to 
receive a draft minu te of order giving effect to this judgment for approval.  
POSTCRIPT  
303. After I had circulated a draft of this judgment to the parties, I was sent a copy of the 
letter from solicitors acting for the defendant s addressed to the claiman ts concerning 
certain of the  claimants ’ horses, referred to at [151] abo ve, which had not been in the 
bundle . The defendants invited me to record their position on this matter . The 
claimants objected, on the basis that it was an attempt to put in further d ocumentation 
after th e trial , and was inappropriate. I agree with the claimants that there is no need 
for me to  alter the sub stance of m y draft judgment at [15 1].  
304. However,  I consider  that, in light of the vivid terms of the entry in the chronology , 
and the undoubted media inter est in sens ational news stories, it would be sensible for 
me formally  to note that the letter, dated 3 December 2018 , and  from a firm called 
Equine Law, makes  a claim  under the Animals Act 1971, section 7C (inserted by  
section 3 of  the Control of Horses Act 2015)  to detai n the claimants ’ horses , which 
are said to be  in their possession, and gives notice  that the claimants should remove 
them w ithin 96 hours  (a period stipulated by the Act  itself ).  
305. It then points out, in accordance wit h section 7C , that, if the horses are not removed  
within that period , they will become the defend ants’ property and the defendants will 
be entitled to dispose of them. The Act itself specifically refers to disposing of a horse 
“by selling i t, arranging for  it to be destroyed or in any other way ”. The solicitors ’ 
letter simply tracks the st atutory language , by refer ring to “sale, destruction or in any 
other way ”, but does not otherwise refer to dispos al. In particular , it does not contain 
any such words as “shoot  the horses ” (or analogues) , as alleged  in the chronology .